Class 10 English Previous Year Question Paper (2023) with Solutions




























		



























		










			
		
    
    
    
        



	

			
		
			
		
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
					
					
					
						
						
							
								Home
Latest Updates

	Latest Education News 2025-2026
	Major Changes in 2026 Board Exams
	Biannual CBSE Board Exams Starting 2026-27


Class 12

	Class 10 & Class 12 English 2026-27 Board Exam Success E-books
	CBSE English
	CBSE Class 12 Elective
	CBSE Hindi
	ISC Class 12 English
	BSEB English


Class 11

	CBSE English
	CBSE Hindi
	Class 11 English (Elective)


Class 10

	Class 10 English 2026 Board Exam Success Ebooks ( Both Courses)
	CBSE 10th English
	CBSE 10th English Communicative
	CBSE 10th Hindi A
	CBSE 10th Hindi B
	CBSE 10th Science
	CBSE 10th Social Sc
	CBSE 10th Sanskrit
	ICSE 10th English
	BSEB 10th English
	Maha Board 10th English
	West Bengal 10th English
	J&K Board 10th English
	JKBOSE Class 10 Hindi
	PSEB Class 10 Hindi Summary and Lesson Notes


Class 9

	CBSE Class 9 English
	CBSE Class 9 English Comm
	ICSE Class 9 English
	Maha Class 9 English
	West Bengal Class 9 English
	CBSE Class 9 Hindi
	CBSE Class 9 Hindi Course A
	CBSE Class 9 SST
	CBSE Class 9 Science


Class 8

	CBSE Class 8 English
	CBSE Class 8 Hindi
	CBSE Class 8 Science
	CBSE Class 8 SST


Class 7

	CBSE Class 7 English
	CBSE Class 7 Hindi


Class 6

	CBSE Class 6 English
	CBSE Class 6 Hindi


Others

	English Writing Skills
	English Grammar
	English Essays
	Hindi Lekhan Kaushal
	Hindi Vyakaran
	
		Rachna ke Aadhar Par Vakya Roopantar — Types, Examples | CBSE Class 10 Hindi vyakaran
	

	Hindi Niband Lekhan
	CUET 2025 Practice Tests
	Entrance Exams Practice Tests


PSEB Class 10 English Summaries and Notes

							
							
							
							
				
					
				
			
						
						
					
				
			
				
				
				
				
			
				
				
			
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
			
			
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
						Search for:
						
						
						
						
						
						
					
				
			
			
				
				
				
				
			
				
				
					
	
	
	

		
		
			
											
											
							Class 10 English Previous Year Question Paper (2023) with Solutions

						 by Meenu Saini | Sep 16, 2024 | General | 0 comments
												
				
					
					 
CBSE Class 10 English Chapter-wise Previous Years Questions (2023) with Solution
 
Class 10 English Question Paper (2023) – Solved Question papers from previous years are very important for preparing for the CBSE Board Exams. It works as a treasure trove. It helps to prepare for the exam precisely. One of key benefits of solving question papers from past board exams is their ability to help identify commonly asked questions. These papers are highly beneficial study resources for students preparing for the upcoming class 10th board examinations. Here we have compiled chapter-wise questions asked in all the sets of CBSE Class 10 English question paper (2023).


 
First Flight Book 
Chapter 1 – A Letter to God
 
Q1. Who read the letter sent by Lencho? What did he do then? [40-50 words]
Ans. A Postman read it and showed it to the Postmaster. Initially he laughed but soon he became serious and decided to gather money and send it to Lencho on behalf of God. He wanted to retain the poor farmer’s faith in God.
 
Q2. What did Lencho hope for and why? [40-50 words]
Ans. Lencho hoped for a good rain as it was much needed for a good harvest of his crop of corn.
 
Q3. In what way would writing a letter to God help Lencho tide over his crisis? [40-50 words]
Ans. Lencho had immense faith in God. After his entire crop was destroyed by the hailstorm, he had no other resort than to seek help from God. Thus, Lencho planned to write a letter to god seeking 100 pesos that would help him sow a new crop and feed his family.
 
Q4. The postmaster had mixed emotions while opening the letter. Explain. [40-50 words]
Ans. The postmaster was feeling curious and contented while opening Lenchos’ second letter. He was looking forward to a letter of thanks from Lencho who should have been thankful to god for getting the money but he is shocked to read that Lencho is dissatisfied and complains that the post office staff is a bunch of crooks who have stolen the remaining thirty Pesos from his envelope.
 
Q5. Why did the night after the rains turn sorrowful for Lencho? [40-50 words]
Ans. It was a miserable night. The fields were covered in hail, giving them a salt-white appearance, and had destroyed the crop. It indicated that there would be no harvest, and Lencho’s family would face starvation.
 
Q6. Why did the night turn sorrowful for Lencho after the rains? [40-50 words]
Ans. The rain was followed by a hailstorm which destroyed the crop in Lencho’s field. Thus the farmer was sorrowful because now they had nothing – no food for the family and no money to sow the fields again.
 
Q7. What are the raindrops compared to and why? [40-50 words]
Ans. Raindrops are compared to new coins- the bigger ones are ten-cent coins while the smaller are five cent. It is because they promised a good harvest and as such good money to Lencho.
 
Also See: 

A Letter to God Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
A Letter to God Summary, Explanation 
A Letter to God MCQs 
A Letter to God Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 2 – Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
To the assembled guests and the watching world, I said : Today, all of us do, by our presence here ….. confer glory and hope to newborn liberty. Out of the experience of an extraordinary human disaster that lasted too long, must be born a society of which all humanity will be proud. We who were outlaws not so long ago, have today been given the rare privilege to be host to the nations of the world on our own soil. We thank all our distinguished international guests for having come to take possession with the people of our country of what is after all, a common victory for justice, for peace, for human dignity.
 
(i) A society that ________ was born out of human disaster.
(a) all humanity would be proud of
(b) was full of extraordinary human disaster
(c) was full of outlaws and fighters
(d) hosts nations on their soil
Ans. (a) 
 
(ii) The former outlaws were given the privilege of _________.
(a) getting citizenship of their country
(b) participating in a trade conclave
(c) finalizing the foreign policy
(d) hosting the nations of the world on their soil
Ans. (d) 
 
(iii) The speaker was overwhelmed with the sense of  _______.
(a) gratitude (b) achievement
(c) happiness (d) charity
Ans. (a)
 
(iv) State whether the following statement is True or False :
The common victory was when South Africa did not become an independent nation.
Ans. False
 
(v) The noun form of the word ‘confer’ is
(a) conferring (b) confident
(c) conference (d) configuring
Ans. (c)
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. Mandela said, “People must learn to hate, and if they can learn to hate, they can be taught to love.” Discuss. [100-120 words]
Ans. According to Nelson, to love comes naturally to the human heart. Since infancy, one experiences love and warmth. However, hatred is taught to us at a later stage. Hatred makes the receiver sad and gloomy. The person who gets hatred seeks love and warmth in order to escape this sadness. Thus, he recognizes love and warmth. As he has suffered hatred, he understands the hurt it brings and gradually, he stops giving hatred. Thus, slowly, the entire society gives up hatred and embraces love.
 
Q2. ‘No one is born hating another person because of the colour of his skin, or his background or his religion’. Do you agree? Elaborate on the basis of the chapter “Nelson Mandela – Long walk to freedom”. [100-120 words]
Ans. Through his fight for freedom, Nelson Mandela demonstrated how hatred was more of a social construct than a basic human trait. He talks about how he observed racism among white people, which was fostered socially rather than naturally. He recalls that despite the prisons’ extreme brutality, there was a sliver of hope for peace in the eyes of a few guards, whose eyes reflected a flicker of humanity. He came to understand that removing someone else’s freedom places the oppressor in a cage of prejudice because hatred is harder on the human heart than love. According to Mandela, hatred is a learned, not innate, trait. But since love comes more naturally to the human heart, if one could learn to hate, they could also be taught to love. No one is therefore born with the intent to spread hatred, but they may do so by way of indirect adaptation to a world that appears to have gone astray.
 
Also See: 

Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom Summary, Explanation 
Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom MCQs 
Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 3 – Two Stories About Flying (Part 1 – His First Flight)
 
Q1. Describe the young seagull’s first flight. [40-50 words]
Ans.  The seagull was starving. When he saw his mother approaching with a fish in its beak, he called out to her but she stopped mid-flight. This provoked the seagull and unaware, it took a flight. Thus, the bird flew and on realizing this, it was glad to have conquered its fear.
 
Q2. ‘Family played a vital role in the first flight of the young seagull.’ 
Give examples to substantiate the above statement. [40-50 words]
Ans. The seagull’s mother played a pivotal role by carrying the fish in its beak and stopping mid-flight in front of the hungry seagull. This pushed the bird to fly out of hunger. The father ignored the coward seagull. This made it feel worthless. The siblings flew around the seagull, they called him to fly too. This was a supportive gesture towards their scared brother.
 
Q3. Motivation plays an important role in taking risks in life and in succeeding. Do you agree? Discuss with reference to the pilot of the old Dakota and the young seagull. [100-120 words]
Ans.  Yes, motivation gives us that push to take up risks in life. We also think that if the other person can accomplish certain tasks, so can we. The role model’s success inspires us to take the first step and break the barriers in our mind. 
In the lesson – Two stories about flying, we see the young seagull who is so scared of taking the first flight. However, immense hunger and the sight of fish in the mother’s beak motivate him and he just takes off the cliff. Even the pilot is so eager to reach home and have an English breakfast with the family, the next morning that he overlooks the dark storm clouds and flies into them. 
Thus, we see that both the characters take risk only because of the great motivating factors.
 
Also See:  

Two Stories About Flying (Part 1 – His First Flight) Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Two Stories About Flying (Part 1 – His First Flight) Summary, Explanation 
Two Stories About Flying (Part 1 – His First Flight) MCQs 
Two Stories About Flying (Part 1 – His First Flight) Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 3 – Two Stories About Flying (Part 2 – The Black Aeroplane)
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
Inside the clouds, everything was suddenly black. It was impossible to see anything outside the aeroplane. The old aeroplane jumped and twisted in the air. I looked at the compass. I couldn’t believe my eyes the compass was turning round and round and round. It was dead. It would not work. The other instruments were suddenly dead, too. I tried the radio. “Paris Control? Paris Control? Can you hear me?” There was no answer. The radio was dead too. I had no radio, no compass, and I could not see where I was. I was lost in the storm.
 
(i) As soon as the pilot was inside the cloud ……………. .
(a) his ears got blocked.
(b) he choked with fear.
(c) his vision was obstructed.
(d) he was jumping up and down.
Ans. (c)
 
(ii) The devices in the aeroplane were ……………. .
(a) malfunctioning.
(b) broken completely.
(c) giving wrong readings.
(d) stopped responding completely.
Ans. (d)
 
(iii) The Paris air control did not reply to the pilot’s call because ……………..
Ans. The Paris air control did not reply to the pilot’s call because the radio was dead and there was no transmission to the Paris air control.
 
(iv) Select the option that correctly captures the application of the word ‘twisted’ as used in the extract.
(a) Ragini twisted Raghav’s wrist.
(b) Ragini twisted the story to suit the occasion.
(c) Ragini did not appreciate Raghav’s twisted bent of mind.
(d) Ragini matched the swimmer as he twisted twice in the air before diving into the water.
Ans. (d)
 
(v) Fill in the blank with ONE WORD only :
The narrator’s …………comes through clearly when he sees the compass turning round and round.
Ans. disbelief
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. ‘I’ll take the risk.” What is the risk? Why does the narrator take it? [40-50 words]
Ans. The “risk” here refers to not doing the right thing, which is flying back to Paris when he came to know about the storm. Despite being aware of the bad weather, the pilot headed straight into the storm and risked the lives of his fellow passengers. The pilot’s decision making was clouded by his wish to meet his family. He so desperately wanted to be with his family and have that English breakfast he had been dreaming of all day, that he took the risk of not going back.
 
Also See: 

Two Stories About Flying (Part 2 – The Black Aeroplane) Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Two Stories About Flying (Part 2 – The Black Aeroplane) Summary, Explanation 
Two Stories About Flying (Part 2 – The Black Aeroplane) MCQs 
Two Stories About Flying (Part 2 – The Black Aeroplane) Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 4 – From the Diary of Anne Frank
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions :
(A) Let me put this more clearly, since no one will believe that a thirteen-year old girl is completely alone in this world. And I’m not. I have loving parents and a sixteen years old sister, and there are almost thirty people I can call friends. I have a family, loving aunts and a good house. No, on the surface I seem to have everything, except my one true friend. All I think about when I am with friends is having a good time. I can’t bring myself to talk about anything, but ordinary everyday things.
 
(i) On the surface, it appears that Anne the thirteen year old girl __________.
Ans. was completely alone.
 
(ii) How can we infer that the speaker felt alone in the world?
(a) She had a family of many people.
(b) She had loving parents.
(c) She had thirty friends.
(d) She craves for a true friend.
Ans. (d)
 
(iii) Anne and her friends talked about _______.
(a) their problematic parents (b) their financial problems
(c) common everyday things (d) the commuting problems
Ans. (c)
 
(iv) Complete the analogy by selecting the suitable word from the text :
alone : friends : : nothing : 
Ans. everything/ something
 
(v) Select the option that correctly captures the usage of the idiom ‘bring myself’ from the extract:
(a) to do something willingly (b) to do something unwillingly
(c) a charitable act (d) an involuntary act
Ans. (b)
 
(B) I wrote the three pages Mr. Keesing had assigned me and was satisfied. I argued that talking is a student’s trait and that I would do my best to keep it under control, but that I would never be able to cure myself of the habit since my mother talked as much as I did, if not more, and that there’s not much one can do about inherited traits.
 
(i) Who was Mr. Keesing?
(a) English teacher
(b) Social Science teacher
(c) Warden
(d) Principal
(e) math teacher
Ans. (e) Maths teacher
 
(ii) According to the extract, the incorrigible habit possessed by the speaker was

 making noise in class

Il. talking too much
Ill. procrastinating

 coming late to class
 asking irritating questions

Select the correct option :
(a) I and III
(b) Only II
(c) I, IV and V
(d) Only III
Ans. (b)
 
(iii) Complete the analogy by selecting the suitable word from the extract.
routine : habit : : characteristic : ___________
Ans. trait
 
(iv) Select the reason why the narrator is unable to control her trait.
(a) She had deliberately practised it.
(b) She wanted to be different from her brother.
(c) Her teacher had encouraged her to continue as she was.
(d) She had inherited it.
Ans. (d)
 
(v) Which of the following most nearly means the opposite of the phrase ‘under control’?
(a) to spend less
(b) unable to take on the challenge
(c) find it difficult to manage
(d) being very stubborn
Ans. (c)
 
(C) I started right away at the Montessori nursery school. I stayed there until I was six, at which time I started in the first form. In the sixth form my teacher was Mrs. Kuperus, the headmistress. At the end of the year we were both in tears as we said a heartbreaking farewell.
In the summer of 1941 Grandma fell ill and had to have an operation, so my birthday passed with little celebration.
 
(i) The narrator ‘I’ refers to
(a) Mr. Keesing (b) Mrs. Kuperus
(c) Anne Frank (d) Miss Margot
Ans. (c)
 
(ii) The phrase ‘right away’ in this extract most nearly means
(a) with delay (b) the correct way
(c) immediately (d) overtaking from right
Ans. (c)
 
(iii) What does the narrator mean by saying ‘we were both in tears’?
Ans. When they got separated, the narrator and her teacher, Mrs Kuperus, both were crying.
 
(iv) Complete the analogy by selecting a word from the text :
dawn : dusk :: mourning : _________
Ans. celebration
 
(v) Select the option that correctly captures the application of the word ‘form’ as used in the extract.
(a) Raghav was in good form while playing the match.
(b) Saheb was promoted to the next form after the annual exam.
(c) My brother did not know how to form a circle.
(d) Anne saw the form on the headmaster’s desk.
Ans. (b)
 
Also See:  

From the Diary of Anne Frank Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
From the Diary of Anne Frank Summary, Explanation 
From the Diary of Anne Frank MCQs 
From the Diary of Anne Frank Character Sketches

 
Chapter 5 – Glimpses of India (Part 1 – A Baker from Goa)
 
Q1. ‘A  Baker from Goa’ is a nostalgic saga of childhood memories. Comment. [40-50 words]
Ans. “A Baker from Goa” evokes nostalgia through vivid childhood memories of the traditional baker’s visits. The story recalls the excitement of hearing the bamboo’s jingle, rushing to meet the baker, and the delight of choosing bread-bangles. It paints a nostalgic picture of simpler times and the joy derived from small pleasures in village life.
 
Q2. Who are paders and why are they friends of children? [40-50 words]
Ans. Goa’s village bakers, known as paders, sell their bakery products by going from door to door. The children in these villages are particularly fond of them as they bring bread bangles and loaves every morning. While the loaves are sold to households, the children enjoy freely munching on the delicious bread bangles.
 
Q3. How is the Goan baker still an important part of the life of a Goan village? [40-50 words]
Ans. In a Goan village, a baker, also known as a “pader,” holds a significant and indispensable role. Bakery items like bol, bolinhas, and cakes are essential components of every social and religious ceremony in the village, and without them, these events are incomplete. Additionally, the daily life-cycle of a Goan household commences with the cheerful arrival of the baker in certain areas, heralded by delightful music. Beyond being a baker, he becomes a friend, companion, and guide to the villagers. His distinct attire and stout physique are strong defining characteristics that contribute to his unique identity within the community. Hence, the baker’s presence and contributions remain cherished and vital to the vibrant fabric of Goan village life.
 
Also See: 

Glimpses of India (Part 1 – A Baker from Goa) Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Glimpses of India (Part 1 – A Baker from Goa) Summary, Explanation 
Glimpses of India (Part 1 – A Baker from Goa) MCQs 
Glimpses of India (Part 1 – A Baker from Goa) Character Sketches

 
Chapter 5 – Glimpses of India (Part 2 – Coorg) 
 
Q1. Where is Coorg located? Write any two characteristics of the people of Coorg? [40-50 words]
Ans. Coorg is located in the state of Karnataka, India, between Mysore and the coastal town of Mangalore. The people of Coorg are known for their martial traditions and distinct culture, possibly tracing back to Greek or Arabic origins. They are also famous for their hospitality, often sharing stories of their ancestors’ bravery.
 
Q2. Valour and hospitality are inherent in the people of Coorg. Explain. [40-50 words]
Ans. The people of Coorg are famous for their bravery. They are known to be of either Arabic or greek descent. The Koorgis narrate tales of valour of their ancestors and they are allowed to carry firearms without licenses. The homes in Coorg are well-known for their hospitality. 
 
Also See:  

Glimpses of India (Part 2 – Coorg) Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Glimpses of India (Part 2 – Coorg) Summary, Explanation 
Glimpses of India (Part 2 – Coorg) MCQs 

 
Chapter 5 – Glimpses of India (Part 3 – Tea from Assam) 
 
Q1. What did Pranjol and Rajvir do during the journey? Why? [40-50 words]
Ans. During their train journey to Assam, Pranjol and Rajvir drank tea and chatted. Rajvir had gathered information which he shared with Pranjol. He shared interesting facts about tea, such as its worldwide popularity and legends about its discovery. Rajvir was fascinated by the lush greenery and tea gardens. Pranjol was calm and read his detective story books throughout the trip. Pranjol had traveeled on this route earlier and so, he was not excited like Rajvir.
 
Q2. What is the Indian legend about the discovery of tea? [40-50 words]
Ans. Bodhidharma, an ancient Buddhist ascetic, cut off his eyelids because he felt sleepy during meditations. Ten tea plants grew out of the eyelids. The leaves of these plants when put in hot water and drunk banished sleep.
 
Q3. Why did Pranjol not share Rajvir’s excitement at seeing the tea gardens? [40-50 words]
Ans. Pranjol had taken the train to Assam several times earlier. He was familiar with the scenery and the tea plantations. Thus, he was not excited as Rajvir was.
 
Also See: 

Glimpses of India (Part 3 – Tea from Assam) Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Glimpses of India (Part 3 – Tea from Assam) Summary, Explanation 
Glimpses of India (Part 3 – Tea from Assam) MCQs 
Glimpses of India (Part 3 – Tea from Assam) Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 7 – Madam Rides the Bus
 
Q1. How did Valli save money to travel by bus? [40-50 words]
Ans. Valli arranged for her bus fare meticulously for her first journey outside the village. Valli needed sixty paise for the two way fare of the bus. She needed some knowledge and ample time. She saved the money herself, collected the information from the passengers and utilised the time of her mother’s nap for it.
 
Q2. Why did Valli spend her time all alone and what became her favourite pastime. [40-50 words]
Ans. Valli spent most of her time alone because she had no friends of her age in the neighbourhood. Therefore, her favourite pastime was standing outside her door and watching the street in front of her house, which provided her with numerous unusual experiences.
 
Q3. How did Valli gather the details of the bus journey? [40-50 words]
Ans. Valli carefully gathered information about the bus trip. In order to learn every detail about the trip, she carefully listened to conversations among her neighbours and other regular bus riders. She also asked thoughtful questions. She learned a great deal about the journey during this process, including numerous minor details.
 
Q4. What stopped Valli from going to the stall to have a drink? What do we learn about Valli from this? [40-50 words]
Ans. Valli just wanted to go on a bus ride and see the surroundings. She did not want to waste money on a drink. Also, she felt that getting down from the bus in an unknown town was not safe for her as she was all alone. This shows that Valli was a mature and responsible girl.
 
Q5. Whenever we want to achieve something, difficulties always come in our way. What did Valli have to do to go and ride in a bus? [100-120 words]
Ans. It is true that obstacles do present themselves whenever we seek anything out. Nonetheless, ambition in life is necessary. Perseverance is necessary to achieve goals. Valli wanted to take the bus, but she lacked the funds to do so. The task at hand was to come up with the necessary sum of money, so Valli had diligently saved whatever spare change that came her way while restraining herself from splurging on things like peppermints, toys, balloons, and the like. At the end, she had thirty pence. She also paid close attention to the bus’ timetable and routine. She also listened in on chats regarding people’s travels. Nonetheless, her efforts allowed her to fulfil her goal in the end.
 
Q6. The people and surroundings are a great book to learn from. Valli in the lesson ‘Madam Rides the Bus’ learns a lot from others. Mention the traits of her character which help her to learn from people and her surroundings. [100-120 words]
Ans. Valli wanted to take the bus ride. She was eager to know about the timings, fare and route of the bus. She carefully watched the bus and deduced that it crossed the street at regular intervals. She overheard the passengers and gathered information about the bus fare. She also asked discreet questions to collect maximum details. On her bus trip, she behaved maturely and confidently. She was careful and cautious. She restricted her outing to the bus journey and did not get lured by the drinks that were on sale at the bus stand in the city. The return journey became eventful for her when she saw the dead cow. It gave her the realization of the temporal nature of life. Thus, the bus journey made her learn a lot of things.
 
Q7. Valli was an extra-ordinary girl who had self-confidence and courage to realise her ambition by planning and drawing on her spirit of adventure. Discuss in reference to the chapter ‘Madam Rides the Bus’. [100-120 words]
Ans. Valli or Valliamai is a young girl of eight years of age. However, she displays a maturity much above her age. She is confident and composed. She has the ability to fulfil her desire by her own means. She gets over the temptations to buy candies and other tempting stuff in order to save up for the bus ride. She is calculative, and does detailed inquiry before going on the bus trip. She plans the trip during her mother’s afternoon nap time. During the bus ride, Valli behaves like an adult and dislikes being treated like a child. She is well-guarded and does not let the conductor and other passengers take her for granted. She is not lured by the attractive drinks at the bus stand in the town. Thus, Valli takes all necessary precautions to make her bus ride a success. 
 
Also See: 

Madam Rides the Bus Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Madam Rides the Bus Summary, Explanation 
Madam Rides the Bus MCQs 
Madam Rides the Bus Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 8 – The Sermon at Benares
 
Q1. What does the Buddha say about the world? [40-50 words]
Ans. According to Buddha the world is affected by suffering, death and decay.
 
Q2. What does Kisa Gotami ask for when she goes from house to house after she speaks with Buddha? Does she get it? Why? Why not? [40-50 words]
Ans. Kisa asks for Mustard seeds from such a house that has not lost a beloved. She is not able to find such a house because there is no such household that has not suffered the pain of losing a beloved to death. 
 
Q3. Kisa Gotami went from door to door when her son died. What was the result? [40-50 words]
Ans. Kisa was looking for a cure for her son and her quest led her to Gautama Buddha. Buddha asked her to get mustard seeds from such a house that had not lost a beloved to death. Thus, she went from one house to another but failed to find such a house that had not suffered the pain of losing a beloved. Thus, Kisa realized that death is the ultimate truth and she accepted her son’s death.
 
Q4. What did Siddhartha Gautama come across by chance when he was about twenty-five years old? [40-50 words]
Ans.  While out hunting, he chanced upon a sick man, then an aged man, then a funeral procession, and finally a monk begging for alms.
 
Q5. What did Kisa Gotami do after the death of her only son? [40-50 words]
Ans. After the death of her only son, Kisa Gotami was overwhelmed with sorrow. Unable to come to terms with this devastating loss, she found herself unable to think clearly. In a state of desperation and grief, she wandered through her neighborhood, holding her lifeless child, and requested everyone whom she met to provide her with some medicine that could bring her child back to life.
 
Q6. Through the story of Kisa Gotami, what did the Buddha try to preach to the common man? [100-120 words]
Ans. Buddha reiterated the ultimate truth of life – death. He wanted to inform the disciples that humans are mortals and death is the final truth. Kisa was a woman whose son died but she could not bear the truth and sought a medicine to bring him to life. People guided her to go to Buddha for a cure and he asked her to fetch mustard seeds from such a household that had not lost a beloved. When Kisa was unsuccessful at finding such a household, she realized that death and loss of a beloved was the ultimate truth. Thus she accepted her son’s death and came over the grief and sadness. 
 
Q7. ‘As ripe fruits are in danger of falling early, so mortals when born are always in danger of death’. With this statement of the Buddha find out the moral values that Kisa Gotami learnt after the death of her child. [100-120 words]
Ans. Kisa Gotami was devastated when she lost her child and resisted accepting death. Buddha demonstrated to her through the aforementioned statement how pain is a universal trait of all living things and how death is unavoidable. No one is untouched. The wisest person, then, knows not to weep. By acknowledging the fleeting nature of life, one can achieve mental peace. This will enable one to conquer sadness and live a blessed life.
 
Q8. Why did Kisa Gotami meet the Buddha? How did Buddha change her life? [100-120 words]
Ans. Kisa’a son, her only child was lifeless and she roamed around the neighbourhood in search of a medicine. She was sent to the Buddha and she sought a remedy for her son. Buddha asked Kisa to get a handful of mustard seeds. The condition was that they should be from such a household that had not lost a beloved to death. When Kisa was unable to find such a household, she became aware of the ultimate truth that humans are mortals. Thus, she realized that she had been selfish in her grief. All humans are in danger of death and death is common to all. Thus, this lesson by Buddha helped Kisa accept her son’s demise and accept that no one can escape death.
 
Also See: 

The Sermon at Benares Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Sermon at Benares Summary, Explanation 
The Sermon at Benares MCQs 
The Sermon at Benares Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 9 – The Proposal
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
Lomov : But you can see from the documents, honoured Natalya Stepanovna. Oxen Meadows, its true were once the subject of dispute, but now everybody knows they are mine. There’s nothing to argue about. You see my aunts grandmother gave the free use of these Meadows in perpetuity to the peasants of your father’s grandfather, in return for which they were to make bricks for her. The peasants belonging to your father’s grandfather had the free use of Meadows for forty years, and had got into the habit of regarding them as their own, when it happened that ……………….
Natalya : No, it isn’t at all like that ! Both grandfather and great grandfather reckoned that their land extended to Burnt Marsh – which means Oxen Meadows were ours. I don’t see what there is to argue about, its simply silly.
 
(i) The subject of dispute was regarding
(a) free use of Meadows.
(b) making of bricks.
(c) peasants using Meadows.
(d) ownership of Meadows.
Ans. (d)
 
(ii) Find the word from the extract which means ‘continuance’ :
(a) dispute
(b) perpetuity
(c) belonging
(d) reckoned
Ans. (b)
 
(iii) Lomov’s aunt’s grandmother gave Oxen Meadows to Natalya’s father’s grandfather in lieu of ……….
Ans. Lomov’s aunt’s grandmother gave Oxen Meadows to Natalya’s father’s grandfather in lieu of the great-grandfather’s peasants constructing bricks for her.
 
(iv) According to Natalya why did Oxen Meadows belong to them?
Ans. Natalya claimed that they owned Oxen Meadows because her great-grandfather and her grandfather believed their land extended to Burnt Marsh, which contained Oxen Meadows.
 
(v) Fill in the blank with ONE WORD only :
The peasants had free use of Meadows for ……………… years.
Ans. forty years
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. How did Chubukov react when Lomov asked for the hand of his daughter in marriage? [40-50 words]
Ans. Chubukov was first suspicious and thought that Lomov had come to ask for some money. But when he came to know the real reason he was overwhelmed with joy because he believed Lomov would be a profitable match for his daughter. So he embraced and kissed Lomov.
 
Q2. Forgiveness is the foundation of a cordial relationship. Do you agree? How is this message conveyed in the play “The Proposal’? [100-120 words]
Ans. Yes it is true that forgiveness is the foundation of all the cordial relationships in our society. Most of the time enmity is developed due to communication gap or misunderstanding. Lack of tolerance and mismanagement of anger lead to enmity. Whenever there is any disagreement or difference of opinion, one must sit together and sort out the issue amicably. One must forgive another. Anton Chekov has conveyed this message in the play ‘The Proposal’. 
The Chubukovs and Lomovs are neighbours and have had several differences in the past. However, when they are about to enter into a new relationship, they drag the past differences and create bitterness in the present too. No one is less when it comes to argue on topics which do not bear any importance in their present lives. Topics such as the ownership of farms and superiority of dogs are trivial in comparison to the proposed wedding of Natalya with Ivan. However, both of them disrespect the other’s family and create unnecessary misunderstandings and lead to quarrel on petty issues. Forgiveness should be inculcated amongst the students in our schools through examples from real life and literature.
 
Also See:   

The Proposal Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Proposal Summary, Explanation 
The Proposal MCQs 
The Proposal Character Sketches 

 
First Flight Poems
 
Poem 3 – A Tiger in the Zoo
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
(A) He stalks in his vivid stripes
The few steps of his cage,
On pads of velvet quiet,
In his quiet rage
He should be lurking in shadow
Sliding through long grass
Near the water hole
Where plump deer pass.
 
(i) Complete the sentence appropriately.
The vivid stripes refer to the _________.
Ans. lines on the tiger’s body
 
(ii) Which word from the extract is the opposite of ‘loud’?
Ans. quiet
 
(iii) The use of the phrase ‘pads of velvet’ means
(a) neck (b) tail
(c) skin (d) paws
Ans. (d)
 
(iv) State whether the following statement is True or False :
The confinement of the cramped space of the cage has restricted the tiger’s steps.
Ans. True
 
(v) The tiger was lurking in shadow ______ .
(a) to catch its prey (b) as the cage was dark
(c) as the velvet was quiet (d) as he was in a rage
Ans. (a)
 
(B) He hears the last voice at night.
The patrolling cars,
And stares with his brilliant eyes
At the brilliant stars.
He stalks in his vivid stripes
A few steps of his cage.
 
(i) Whose is the last voice heard by the tiger?
(a) police jeep
(b) patrolling cars
(c) watchmen
(d) roar of lion
Ans. (b)
 
(ii) Complete the sentence appropriately.
It is clear that ‘Repetition’ is the poetic device used for ‘his brilliant eyes at the brilliant stars’ because ___________. (Clue : explain how repetition applies here)
Ans. Brilliant is repeated to create a similarity between the tiger’s eyes and the stars.
 
(iii) The main contrasting ideas in this extract are
(a) tiger and deer.
(b) cruelty and sympathy.
(c) confinement and freedom.
(d) master and slave.
Ans. (c)
 
(iv) The use of the word ‘stalks’ creates an image of
(a) cowardice.
(b) frustration.
(c) lethargy.
(d) purposefulness.
Ans. (a)
 
(v) State whether the following statement is True or False :
The poem uses ‘staring at the sky’ to symbolize the freedom ‘he’ yearns for.
Ans. True
 
(C) He stalks in his vivid stripes
The few steps of his cage,
On pads of velvet quiet,
In his quiet rage.
He should be lurking in shadow,
Sliding through long grass
Near the water hole
Where plump deer pass.
 
(i) ‘Quiet rage’ refers to the tigers …………..
(a) helplessness
(b) he has not been able to hunt
(c) his prey has not come to the water hole
(d) he is not free
Ans. (a)
 
(ii) He is lurking in shadows because ………..
Ans. He is lurking in shadows because he doesn’t want his prey to notice him, which might drive them away before he pounces on them.
 
(iii) Complete the sentence appropriately :
It is clear that metaphor is the poetic device used for ‘pads of velvet’ because …………… (clue-explain how metaphor applies here).
Ans. It is clear that metaphor is the poetic device used for ‘pads of velvet’ because as an analogy between the softness of velvet and the way his pads contact the ground, his paw pads are being compared to velvet in this instance.
 
(iv) Find a word from the extract which means – to walk with measured, stiff or haughty strides :
(a) steps
(b) lurking
(c) pads
(d) stalk
Ans. (d)
 
(v) State whether the following statement is TRUE or FALSE:
The tiger is stealthily waiting for the deer to come to the water hole.
Ans. TRUE
 
(D) He stalks in his vivid stripes 
The few steps of his cage
On pads of velvet quiet
In his quiet rage.
He should be lurking in shadow
Sliding through long grass
Near the water hole
Where plump deer pass.
 
(i) ‘He is in a rage because he is
(a) hungry (b) tied
(c) thirsty (d) in a cage
Ans. (d)
 
(ii) He is lurking in the shadow because ______.
Ans. He is lurking in the shadow because he wants to pounce upon his prey.
 
(iii) The above lines express the tiger’s _______.
(a) resignation (b) fear
(c) anger (d) acceptance
Ans. (c)
 
(iv) Complete the sentence appropriately :
It is clear that metaphor is the poetic device used for ‘pads of velvet’ — because _______. (Clue : explain how metaphor is applied here.)
Ans. The tiger’s paws are as smooth and soft as velvet, so when he walks, they do not create any sound.
 
(v) The contrast in the above extract is between life in the forest and life in the
(a) circus (b) national park
(c) cave (d) zoo
Ans. (d)
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. How would the tiger behave in the forest? [40-50 words]
Ans. He would roam around, baring his teeth and scaring the villagers. He would hide behind tall grass, waiting for the prey to pass.
 
Q2. What does the tiger in the zoo do at night? [40-50 words]
Ans. He hears the siren of the patrol car and looks at the bright stars.
 
Q3. State any three disadvantages that the tiger faces inside a cage. [40-50 words]
Ans. He is locked, he cannot scare the visitors and he does not roar.
 
Also See: 

A Tiger in the Zoo Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
A Tiger in the Zoo Summary, Explanation 
A Tiger in the Zoo MCQs 
A Tiger in the Zoo Character Sketches 

 
Poem 4 – How to Tell Wild Animals
 
Read the given extracts and answer the questions :
(A) Though to distinguish beasts of prey
A novice might nonplus,
The crocodiles you always may
Tell from the Hyena thus:
Hyenas come with merry smiles;
But if they weep they’re crocodiles.
 
(i) Select the appropriate option to complete the sentence, according to the extract :
Crocodiles can be identified by their __________.
(a) tears (b) attitude
(c) smiles (d) attacks
Ans. (a)
 
(ii) State whether the following statement is True or False :
Hyenas are famous for weeping.
Ans. False
 
(iii) ‘Novice’ in line 2 means the same as :
(a) learner (b) beast
(c) tender foot (d) beginner
Ans. (d)
 
(iv) In this extract the poet has presented two different behavioural traits of animals. They are _________.
Ans. Hyenas with merry smiles; crocodiles weeping
 
(v) The poet uses ‘A novice might nonplus’ instead of the novice might get confused. How does this usage impact the poem?
(a) adds an incorrect option.
(b) it is associated with beasts.
(c) it rhymes and adds humour.
(d) it simplifies the meaning.
Ans. (c)
 
(B) Or if some time when roaming round,
A noble wild beast greets you,
With black stripes on a yellow ground,
Just notice if he eats you.
This simple rule may help you learn
The Bengal Tiger to discern.
 
(i) Who is the ‘noble wild beast’ in the above lines?
(a) zebra
(b) Asian Tiger
(c) Asian Lion
(d) Bengal Tiger
Ans. (d)
 
(ii) Complete the sentence appropriately.
It is clear that ‘Alliteration’ is the poetic device used for ‘roaming round’ because _______. (Clue : explain how alliteration applies here)
Ans. It is clear that ‘Alliteration’ is the poetic device used for ‘roaming round’ because “ro” is the sound getting repeated and even “r” is being repeated.
 
(iii) State whether the following statement is True or False :
The extract helps to identify a Royal Bengal Tiger.
Ans. False
 
(iv) In the given lines, what effect does the poet create?
‘Just notice if he eats you.
This simple rule may help you learn
The Bengal Tiger to discern.’
(a) irony
(b) terror
(c) sympathy
(d) criticism
Ans. (a)
 
(v) Which word in the extract tells you that you have recognised the ‘noble beast’?
(a) rule
(b) discern
(c) roaming
(d) notice
Ans. (d)
 
(C) If strolling forth, a beast you view,
Whose hide with spots is peppered,
As soon as he has leapt on you,
You’ll know it’s the leopard.
‘Twill do no good to roar with pain,
He’ll only lep and lep again.
 
(i) One can find out that it is a leopard by the way it _____.
(a) leaps (b) eats
(c) looks (d) roars
Ans. (c)
 
(ii) State whether the following statement is true or false :
When an animal repeatedly leaps at a person, it is a leopard.
Ans. true
 
(iii) Complete the sentence appropriately :
It is clear that repetition is a poetic device used for ‘lep and lep again’ because _____.
(Clue : explain how repetition is applied here.)
Ans. It is clear that repetition is a poetic device used for ‘lep and lep again’ because repetition of ‘lep’ emphasizes how a leopard leaps upon its prey.
 
(iv) The Royal Bengal Tiger has black stripes on yellow skin whereas a leopard has ______.
Ans. The Royal Bengal Tiger has black stripes on yellow skin whereas a leopard has dark spots on its light-coloured body.
 
(v) Complete the analogy with a word from the extract :
claws : nails ::? : skin
Ans. hide
 
Also See: 

How To Tell Wild Animals Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
How To Tell Wild Animals Summary, Explanation 
How To Tell Wild Animals MCQs 

 
Poem 5 – The Ball Poem
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
What is the boy now, who has lost his ball,
What, what is he to do? I saw it go
Merrily bouncing, down the street and then
Merrily over — there it is in the water !
No use to say ‘O there are other balls’ :
(The Ball Poem)
 
(i) What does the expression ‘what, what is he to do’ denote?
(a) loss of the ball
(b) ask the poet for another ball
(c) boy’s grief over the loss of the ball
(d) go down the street
Ans. (a)
 
(ii) State whether the following statement is True or False :
The poet was delighted to watch the ball bouncing down the street into the water.
Ans. False
 
(iii) The poet repeats the word ‘what’ in order to ____________ .
Ans. The poem repeats the word what in order to give the poem a rhyme and rhythm.
 
(iv) There is no use to say ‘O there are other balls’ indicates that the poet feels that it would be ____________ to console the boy.
(a) helpful
(b) futile
(c) easy
(d) shameful
Ans. (b)
 
(v) ‘What is the boy now, who has lost his ball.’
Which feeling is expressed in this line?
(a) regret
(b) cheer
(c) despair
(d) thrill
Ans. (a)
 
Also See: 

The Ball Poem Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Ball Poem Summary, Explanation 
The Ball Poem MCQs 
The Ball Poem Character Sketches 

 
Poem 6 – Amanda
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
Don’t eat that chocolate Amanda !
Remember your acne, Amanda !
Will you please look at me when I’m speaking to you Amanda !
(I am Rapunzel, I have not a care; life in tower is tranquil and rare, I’ll certainly never let down my bright hair)
 
(i) The Speaker’s tone is
(a) loving. (b) hopeful.
(c) instructive. (d) indifferent.
Ans. (c)
 
(ii) Complete the analogy with a word from the extract :
rare : uncommon :: peace : …………………
Ans. tranquil
 
(iii) State whether the following statement is TRUE or FALSE :
Amanda did not want anyone to invade her privacy and silence.
Ans. TRUE
 
(iv) Select the appropriate option :
Amanda’s mother is continuously ………. Amanda.
(a) encouraging (b) reprimanding
(c) motivating (d) disappointing
Ans. (b)
 
(v) Which word in the extract is opposite in meaning to the word ‘dull’?
(a) dreary (b) shady
(c) bright (d) angry
Ans. (c)
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. What impression do you form about Amanda in the poem? [40-50 words]
Ans. Amanda is an innocent young girl. She is immature and dislikes her mother’s constant nagging and scolding. Amanda wants to be free and escape her mother’s continuous intervention.
 
Q2. Why does Amanda wish to be a mermaid? [40-50 words]
Ans. Amanda, who is often chastised by her parents for being lazy, imagines herself as a mermaid who lives a carefree, unrestricted existence on the gentle waves in the green sea. Amanda wants to escape from the daily nagging and reprimanding of her parents by using such fantasy.
 
Also See: 

Amanda Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Amanda Summary, Explanation 
Amanda MCQs 
Amanda Character Sketches 

 
Poem 9 – The Tale of Custard the Dragon
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
But the dragon was a coward, and she called him Custard.
Custard the dragon had big sharp teeth,
And spikes on top of him and scales underneath
Mouth like a fireplace, chimney for a nose,
And realio, trulio daggers on his toes.
 
(i) Complete the analogy by selecting the suitable word from the extract.
sharp : blunt : : above : ______
Ans. below
 
(ii) Which one of the following is not a feature of the Dragon?
(a) big sharp teeth
(b) spikes on the top
(c) brave as a lion
(d) could release fire from the mouth
Ans. (c)
 
(iii) What effect does the poet want to create by the simile ‘mouth like a fireplace’?
(a) emphasis
(b) compassion
(c) rhyme
(d) pathos
Ans. (a)
 
(iv) Complete the sentence appropriately.
It is clear that ‘Metaphor’ is the poetic device used for ‘chimney for a nose’ because ________. (Clue : explain how metaphor applies here)
Ans. The poet is comparing the dragon’s nose to a chimney. The nose also gives out gushes of air like a chimney. There is no use of ‘like’ or ‘as’ so this comparison is called a metaphor.
 
(v) State whether the following statement is True or False based on the given extract :
Custard’s formidable appearance was a true reflection of his courage.
Ans. True
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. How does the poem ‘The Tale of Custard The Dragon’ differ from the traditional ballad? [40-50 words]
Ans. It is fictitious, and has a lesson so it is more of a fable than a ballad.
 
Q2. What did custard look like? [40-50 words]
Ans. Custard the dragon had big sharp teeth, spikes on his back, and scales all over. His mouth was like a fireplace, and his nose looked like a chimney. The toenails were sharp like daggers. Despite his fierce appearance, Custard was known for being timid and scared, preferring safety over bravery in dangerous situations.
 
Q3. How did the other pets celebrate Custard getting rid of the pirate? [40-50 words]
Ans. Mustard licked Custard while Ink and Blink sang in happiness and danced around Custard.
 
Q4. Describe how Custard the dragon fights with the Pirate. [40-50 words]
Ans. The other members of the family scrambled for safety when the pirate attacked, but Custard charged in to engage the intruder head on. The dragon snorted like an engine, charged at the pirate like a “robin at a worm,” and swallowed him whole while the pirate fired his pistol in an attempt to defend himself from the beast. Custard gobbled every bit of him.
 
Q5. What character trait is revealed of Custard when he accepts that the other animals are braver than him. [40-50 words]
Ans. Even though he was braver and more courageous than other characters during the pirate attack episode, Custard the Dragon was revealed to be a character full of humility. Although Custard was known to be extremely timid and shy, the entire Belinda household witnessed his bravery and couldn’t believe their eyes.
 
Q6. Describe the pirate who comes through the window. [40-50 words]
Ans. The pirate who planned to raid Belinda’s home held a shining cutlass between his teeth and held two pistols, one in each hand. He was dressed in all black, and one of his legs was a wooden stump.
 
Also See: 

The Tale of Custard the Dragon Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Tale of Custard the Dragon Summary, Explanation 
The Tale of Custard the Dragon MCQs 
The Tale of Custard the Dragon Character Sketches 

 
Poem 10 – For Anne Gregory
 
Q1. The poet in the poem ‘For Anne Gregory’ conveys beauty as temporary. Explain with reference to the poem. [40-50 words]
Ans. The poet tells Anne that no young man shall ever love her for what she is but for her yellow coloured hair. Anne replies that she could dye her hair to another colour and then her  physical beauty that had attracted the young men would vanish. Then perhaps someone would love her for what she was and not for how she looked. 
 
Q2. What did an old religious man declare in the poem, ‘For Anne Gregory’? [40-50 words]
Ans. He declared that only God loves us for what we are and not for how we appear.
 
Q3. What is the colour of the woman’s hair? Why will she change the colour of her hair? [40-50 words]
Ans. Her hair is yellow coloured also called honey-coloured. She will change the colour of her hair with dye so that the young men who love her for her yellow hair colour would love her for what she is other than her yellow hair.
 
Also See: 

For Anne Gregory Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
For Anne Gregory Summary, Explanation 
For Anne Gregory MCQs 
For Anne Gregory Character Sketches 

 
Footprints without Feet Book

Chapter 1 – A Triumph of Surgery
 
Q1. What was Mr. Herriot’s strict advice? Did Mrs. Pumphrey agree to his advice? [40-50 words]
Ans. Mr Herriot was very strict and told Mrs. Pumphrey that if she did not cut on its food and give him more exercise, Tricki would get sick. She agreed to his advice but it was difficult for her to harden her heart. 
 
Q2. Why was Mr. Herriot shocked at Tricki’s appearance? [40-50 words]
Ans. The doctor was shocked to see Tricki who appeared like a swollen sausage. The pet’s legs were invisible. It was listless, had bloodshot eyes and the tongue lolled from the jaws. 
 
Q3. How did Mrs. Pumphery treat Tricki? [40-50 words]
Ans. She was liberal with Tricki. Mrs Pumphrey over indulged Tricki, fed it extras between meals and couldn’t bear to refuse. She took Tricki along with her for short walks. She pampered it which finally made it sluggish and listless.
 
Q4. What excuses did Mrs. Pumphrey make about Mr. Herriot’s advice? [40-50 words]
Ans. Mrs Pumphrey said that she was concerned about Tricki being listless. As it was due to malnutrition, she fed it little extras between meals to build up its energy. She started supplementing his meals with malt and cod-liver oil, even adding a bowl of Horlicks at night. She couldn’t bear to refuse its favourite cream cakes and chocolates. Hodgkin the gardener had been ill and couldn’t take Tricki for games. 
 
Also See: 

A Triumph of Surgery Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
A Triumph of Surgery Summary, Explanation 
A Triumph of Surgery MCQs 
A Triumph of Surgery Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 2 – The Thief’s Story 
 
Q1. Why does Anil not hand over Hari Singh to the police? [40-50 words]
Ans. Anil was a kind man. He knew that Hari had committed the theft but he did not hand him over to the police because when Hari returned the money, he had realized his mistake and was sorry for it. Thus, there was no need to hand him over to the police.
 
Q2. How did Hari Singh justify to himself his stealing Anil’s money? [40-50 words]
Ans. Hari justified his act of stealing Anil’s money by thinking that if he would not take it, Anil would waste the money on his friends. Moreover, Anil did not pay Hari so he deserved taking it.
 
Q3. What does the thief say about the different reactions of the people when they are robbed? [40-50 words]
Ans. Greedy people can be robbed easily and they can afford being robbed. However, it is difficult to rob a careless man who doesn’t even notice that he has been robbed. This takes away the pleasure out of the work.
 
Q4. Why did Hari Singh smile in his most appealing way towards the end of the story? [40-50 words]
Ans.  When Anil gave him a wet fifty-rupee note, Hari realized that Anil had forgiven him. This strengthened their mutual bond of trust which gave Hari the hope for a better future. 
 
Q5. Trust and compassion can reform a person. Justify this statement in the light of the lesson ‘The Thief’s Story’. [100-120 words]
Ans. In the lesson, The Thief’s Story, we see that Anil trusts Hari Singh and even overlooks the petty thefts committed by Hari. This casual attitude towards money reforms Hari who loses interest in committing thefts. Anil’s positive attitude and blind faith motivates Hari to return the stolen money. Hari feels that the stolen money is worthless in comparison to the immense trust that Anil has in him. Hari feels that the companionship and guidance of a person like Anil can make Hari a well-educated, white collared individual who can earn much more through his efforts and hard-work. Thus, the thief Hari Singh is reformed through Anil’s trusting and compassionate nature. 
 
Also See: 

The Thief’s Story Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Thief’s Story Summary, Explanation 
The Thief’s Story MCQs 
The Thief’s Story Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 3 – The Midnight Visitor 
 
Q1. How did Ausable get rid of Max without using a weapon? [40-50 words]
Ans. When Ausable told Max that it was the police at the door, Max got in a hurry to escape and he accepted Ausable’s talk of there being a balcony outside the window. Max planned to hide in the balcony and jumped from the window. However, there was nothing of the kind and he jumped to death.
 
Q2. Describe Max as a secret agent. [40-50 words]
Ans. Max was thin, with average height. He was crafty like a fox. There was nothing menacing about him except his pistol. He visited Ausable to steal some important documents relating to new missiles. Ausable outwitted Max and made him jump out of the room’s window.
 
Also See:   

The Midnight Visitor Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Midnight Visitor Summary, Explanation 
The Midnight Visitor MCQs 
The Midnight Visitor Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 4 – A Question of Trust
 
Q1. What does the phrase ‘honour among thieves’ mean? Why does Horace get angry at this phrase? [40-50 words]
Ans. The phrase means that one thief should respect another thief because they both belong to the same profession. In the story, we see that one thief outsmarts the other, takes his help in committing the theft, escapes with the booty and gets him arrested. Thus, one thief cheats another one and thus, does not honour him. Horace is the thief who is cheated and so, he is irritated at being cheated by another thief.
 
Also See:   

A Question of Trust Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
A Question of Trust Summary, Explanation 
A Question of Trust MCQs 
A Question of Trust Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 5 – Footprints without Feet
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
(A) Mrs. Hall almost fell down the stairs in hysterics. She was convinced that the room was haunted by spirits and that the stranger had somehow caused these to enter into her furniture.
 
(i) Mrs. Hall tripped because _________
(a) the floor was oily.
(b) she was standing on a chair.
(c) she was in a state of panic.
(d) the door was slammed.
Ans. (c)
 
(ii) Mrs. Hall suspected everything in the room was put under a spell of witchcraft by _____.
Ans. the stranger
 
(iii) Fill in the blank with one word only :
Mrs. Hall was afraid that spirits had entered her ______.
Ans. into furniture
 
(iv) According to the extract, the feeling of Mrs. Hall can be best described as
(1) stunned (2) happy
(3) awestruck (4) nervous
(5) outraged (6) agitated
Select the correct option :
(a) (2) and (4) 
(b) (3) and (6)
(c) (5) and (6) 
(d) (1) and 6)
Ans. (b)
 
(v) ‘Spirits’ in the above lines means the same as
(a) ghosts
(b) conscience
(c) ego 
(d) attitude
Ans. (a)
 
(B) His landlord disliked him and tried to eject him. In revenge, Griffin set fire to the house. To get away without being seen he had to remove his clothes. Thus it was that he became a homeless wanderer, without clothes, without money and quite invisible — until he happened to step in some mud, and left footprints as he walked !
 
(i) Griffin’s landlord tried to eject him because
(a) he was a lawless person.
(b) he had set his house on fire.
(c) he didn’t like him.
(d) he was a drug addict.
Ans. (c)
 
(ii) Fill in the blank with one word only.
Griffin deliberately removed his clothes because he wanted to become _______.
Ans. invisible
 
(iii) Select the option that correctly captures the application of the word ‘fire’ as used in this extract.
(a) Griffin said that he would fire the manager.
(b) The soldiers opened fire at the enemy.
(c) His remarks provoked heavy fire from the political opponents.
(d) The Amar Palace was completely destroyed by the fire.
Ans. (d)
 
(iv) Griffin’s presence was felt when
(a) he jumped into the water with a splash.
(b) he wore clothes.
(c) he left muddy footprints.
(d) he stepped in mud.
Ans. (c)
 
(v) Which of the following is not true with reference to the given extract?
(a) Griffin had become penniless.
(b) Griffin promised to behave himself.
(c) Griffin revealed himself by his muddy footprints.
(d) No one could see Griffin when he took off his clothes.
Ans. (c)
 
(C) The two boys started in surprise at the fresh muddy imprints of a pair of bare feet. What was a barefooted man doing on the steps of a house in the middle of London? And where was the man?
As they gazed, a remarkable sight met, their eyes. A fresh footmark appeared from nowhere !
Further footprints followed, one after another, descending the steps and progressing down the street. The boys followed, fascinated, until the muddy impressions became fainter and fainter and at last disappeared altogether.
 
(i) The boys were surprised to see a barefooted man in London because ______.
(a) everybody in London moved around in shoes.
(b) it was very cold in London to move around barefoot.
(c) the muddy footprints were fresh.
(d) only a homeless person would walk barefoot.
Ans. (b)
 
(ii) Select the option that correctly captures the usage of the word ‘started’ in the above extract.
(a) When I reached the theatre the movie had already started.
(b) The fire started from the kitchen.
(c) On hearing the bell ring, the sleeping Raman started and jumped out of bed.
(d) Taking a deep breath, Ravi started down the stairs.
Ans. (c)
 
(iii) The boys reaction can best be described as
(a) captivated, bored 
(b) repulsed, absorbed
(c) curious, unhappy 
(d) captivated, interested
Ans. (d)
 
(iv) Complete the analogy by selecting the suitable word from the text :
Disappeared : Vanished :: Extraordinary :
Ans. remarkable
 
(v) According to the extract the boys were ____ when they saw the footmark.

 terrified 2. nervous
 delighted 4. curious
 puzzled

Select the correct option :
(a) 1, 2, 4 
(b) Only 1
(c) 4 and 5 
(d) 2 and 3
Ans. (c)
 
Also See: 

Footprints Without Feet Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Footprints Without Feet Summary, Explanation 
Footprints Without Feet MCQs 
Footprints Without Feet Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 6 – The Making of a Scientist
 
Q1. What opinion did Mr. Weiherer, Ebright’s Social Science teacher have about him? [40-50 words]
Ans. Mr Weiherer opines that Richard would make an extra effort and would put in extra three to four hours at night doing debate research besides the other research work. He was competitive in a positive sense, he wanted to win because he wanted to give his best.
 
Q2. How did Ebright’s mother help him to become a scientist? [40-50 words]
Ans. Richard Ebright’s Mother was a dedicated, encouraging, and supporting person. She recognized his love for science and went out of her way to provide him with the resources and opportunities to pursue his interests. She frequently accompanied him to the library and even bought for him equipment including a telescope, a microscope, cameras, mounting materials, etc that would be helpful in many ways. She encouraged Richard to set high standards for himself and instilled in him the value of hard work and perseverance.
 
Q3. Why did Richard Ebright raise a flock of butterflies? [40-50 words]
Ans. Richard Ebright as a child had developed a keen interest for collecting things like rocks, fossils, coins and butterflies. By the time he reached his second grade, he had collected all the twenty-five species of butterflies found in Pennsylvania. He also started tagging the Monarch’s at the behest of the author Dr. Urquhart.
 
Q4. What lesson did Ebright learn when he did not win anything at a science fair? [40-50 words]
Ans. When Richard Ebright did not win anything at the science fair, he realized that the winners had performed real experiments. He, on the other hand, had simply made a neat display of slides. He had shown slides of frog tissues under a microscope. It was the first time that he got a hint of what real science was. Thus, he had to perform real experiments to win a prize.
 
Also See: 

The Making of a Scientist Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Making of a Scientist Summary, Explanation 
The Making of a Scientist MCQs 
The Making of a Scientist Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 7 – The Necklace
 
Q1. Those who are satisfied with what they have are happy in life. Those who aspire more than what they can afford ruin their life. Matilda was one such person. If she were content with her life she would have led a happy life. Elaborate on the basis of the chapter ‘The Necklace.’ [100-120 words]
OR
Q2. Mme Loisel’s disposition invites her doom. Elucidate with reference to the text. [100-120 words]
OR
Q3. Contentment in one’s life is very important to lead a peaceful life. We should be happy with what we have and should not crave for what we don’t have. Matilda suffered in life because she was not content in her life. Her desires led to her disaster. What do you learn from her mistake in life? [100-120 words]
OR
Q4. Matilda’s over-ambitiousness was the cause of her destruction. Justify. [100-120 words]
OR
Q5. Matilda was very proud of her beauty and charm and this led to her downfall. Elaborate. [100-120 words]
 
Ans. Matilda Loisel is a gorgeous but unhappy young woman who longs to join the wealthy upper class to which she believes her beauty entitles her. Matilda is dissatisfied and ungrateful despite her husband’s selfless efforts to please her and make her happy. When Matilda and her husband receive a party invitation from the minister of education, Matilda finally gets the chance to live her aspirations. In order to look her best for the party, Matilda borrows a diamond necklace from her friend Jeanne Forestier. At the ball, Matilda is a huge hit, but tragedy befalls when she misplaces the necklace. In order to pay for a replacement that ultimately turns out to be a fake, Matilda is obliged to work for ten years. As Matilda struggles with poverty, her beauty begins to fade. Matilda only understands the true worth of contentment at that point and the risk of her constant desire of materialistic things and social status. Thus, if Matilda would have remained content in her own possessions, she would not have to bear such a loss and the subsequent miseries.
 
Also See: 

The Necklace Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Necklace Summary, Explanation 
The Necklace MCQs 
The Necklace Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 8 – Bholi
 
Q1. Education is always a great asset in the life of a woman. How did Bholi, an educated girl, face the challenge posed by Bishamber’s greed? [100-120 words]
OR
‘Education is considered the most important tool for empowering women in society. It plays an important role in social and cultural development.’ Prove the above statements in the light of the story ‘Bholi’. [100-120 words]
Ans. Bholi is an educated independent woman. She does not need the financial support from another person. It is due to her financial freedom and education that she could refuse marrying a dowry-seeker. Bishamber is her father’s age and when he insults Bholi’s father, Bholi saves her father from humiliation by refusing to marry such a man. Bholi vows to live with her parents for the rest of her life and serve them. She is not a dumb cow who will be tied to any post. She has her own mind and can take her own decisions. Education can empower every woman and enable her to make the right decisions in life.
 
Q2. Bholi was believed to be a ‘dumb cow’. What turned her into a fearless, bold and confident girl? [100-120 words]
Ans. As a child, Bholi was neglected and weak. She did not get any love and affection. She was treated to be a burden, a simpleton who lacked courage to such an extent that she stammered. Her teacher changed her life. The teacher’s affection and understanding converted Bholi to Sulekha, a wise, intelligent and educated woman who was enabled to speak up for herself.  Bholi started believing in herself. She became brave and confident. She stood up against a bad marriage proposal. Bholi showed she was not dumb but strong and smart. Her teacher’s support changed her life.
 
Q3. Destiny had been cruel to Bholi yet she made a place for herself in a conservative society. Discuss. [100-120 words]
Ans. A child receives love and unending care from the family. However, this was not the case with Bholi. Being the fourth daughter of her parents, she was considered an unwanted burden. She lacked confidence, was fearful and mentally frail. Bord as Sulekha, soon she was nicknamed Bholi meaning a Simpleton because the family considered her to be dumb and useless. Destiny had other plans for Bholi when her teacher entered her life. She gave Bholi the affection and attention which changed Bholi. She grew up into an educated, confident woman. Bholi was able to take a stand for herself and refuse marrying an old dowry-seeker. Her character is an example for all woman who struggle to make their identity. 
 
Also See:  

Bholi Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Bholi Summary, Explanation 
Bholi MCQs 
Bholi Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 9 – The Book that Saved the Earth
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
Think-Tank: That’s better Noodle, I wish to be placed in communication with our manned space probe to that ridiculous little planet we are going to put under our generous rulership. What do they call it, again?
Noodle : Earth, your Intelligence.
Think-Tank: Earth — of course. You see how insignificant the place is? But first something important. My mirror. I wish to consult my mirror.
 
(i) Think-Tank wants to communicate with the _____ .
(a) People of Earth
(b) Scientists on Earth
(c) Environmentalists on Earth
(d) Martians on Earth
Ans. (d) Martians on Earth
 
(ii) Complete the analogy by selecting the suitable word from the passage.
read : learn : : explore: _______.
Ans. probe
 
(iii) Your Intelligence refers to
(a) Earth
(b) Noodle
(c) Little Planet
(d) Think-Tank
Ans. (d) Think-Tank
 
(iv) What does Think-Tank want to do?
Ans. He wants to communicate with the space probe
 
(v) Fill in the blank with one word only.
Think-Tank is a ________ of the Martian team.
Ans. leader
 
Also See: 

The Book That Saved The Earth Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Book That Saved The Earth Summary, Explanation 
The Book That Saved The Earth MCQs 
The Book That Saved The Earth Character Sketches 

 
					
					
					on


		   
		  
		  	   
					
		Submit a Comment Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
Website 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
		
		 

Δ
	
							
				

						

				
					

					




		English Grammar			All English Grammar Topics, Exercises, examples, MCQ Tests
English Grammar Examples
Active and Passive Voice Definition, Rules, Exercise, and Example Sentences
Countable and Uncountable Nouns Meaning, Definition, Difference and Examples
Direct and Indirect Speech, Format, Rules, Exercise, and Examples
Determiners Definition, Types, Exercise and Examples
All About Tenses | Tenses Examples, Types of Tenses in English Grammar
English Vocabulary for Bank PO Exams – Synonyms MCQ Videos
Noun Definition, Types, Exercise with Examples in Hindi and English
What is a Verb? Definition, Types of Verbs, Exercise and Verbs Examples in Hindi and English
What is a Preposition? Definition, Types, Exercise, and Examples in Hindi and English
Subject Verb Agreement Rules and Examples
Modals Definition | Modals Exercise, List of Modals with Examples
Master Tenses in English Grammar – The Easy Way

		English Writing Skills			English Grammar Examples
All English Grammar Topics, Exercises, examples, MCQ Tests
Analytical Paragraph Writing | Format, Examples, Samples
Report Writing Format | How to Report Writing Examples, Topics, Samples and Types
Letter to Editor Class 10 to 12, Topics, Sample and Example
Informal Letter Format, Topics, Examples
Article Writing Format, Topics and Examples
Classified advertisement writing examples
Letter to the Principal, Format, Samples
Story Writing , Format, Topics, Examples
Job Application with Biodata, Format, Topics, Examples
Leave Application Format for Office, School and Sample
Leave Application for Marriage, Format, Sample, and Examples
Speech Writing format, examples for Class 11, 12
Invitation writing tips for class 12
Report writing tips for class 12
10 Important Things to DO to score more in Debate writing question
Let us revise Reported Speech in 9 Quick Steps
Job Application Writing Tips for Class 12 English
Tips to ace the question on Analytical Paragraph writing in Class 10

		Class 10 School Lessons			CBSE Class 10 Important Questions
CBSE Class 10 English Lesson Explanation
CBSE Class 10 English MCQs
CBSE Class 10 English Important Questions
Class 10 English First Flight word meaning
Class 10 English First Flight Poems word meaning
Class 10 English Footprints without Feet word meanings
CBSE Class 10 English Chapter-wise Video Explanations
CBSE Class 10 English MCQs Videos
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 10 
CBSE Class 10 English Important Questions Videos
CBSE Class 10 Science Lessons Explanation
CBSE Class 10 Science Chapter-wise Video Explanation
CBSE Class 10 Science MCQs
CBSE Class 10 Science MCQs Videos
CBSE Class 10 Science Important Questions
CBSE Class 10 Science Important Questions Videos
CBSE Class 10 Hindi Lessons Explanation
CBSE Class 10 Hindi Chapter-wise Video Explanation
CBSE Class 10 History Lessons Explanation
CBSE Class 10 SST Chapter-wise Video Explanations
CBSE Class 10 History MCQs
CBSE Class 10 Geography MCQs
CBSE Class 10 Civics MCQs
CBSE Class 10 Social Science Important Questions
CBSE Class 10 Sanskrit Video Explanations

		Other Classes			CBSE Class 12 English Lesson Explanation
CBSE Class 12 English MCQs
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 12 
CBSE Class 12 English Important Question
CBSE Class 11 English Lesson Explanation
CBSE Class 11 English MCQs
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 11
CBSE Class 11 English Important Questions
CBSE Class 9 English Lesson Explanation
CBSE Class 9 English MCQs
CBSE Class 9 English Chapter-wise Video Explanation
CBSE Class 9 English MCQs Videos
CBSE Class 9 English Important Questions Videos
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 9 
CBSE Class 9 Science Lessons
CBSE Class 9 Hindi Lessons
CBSE Class 9 Hindi MCQs
CBSE Class 9 Science Chapter-wise Video Explanation
CBSE Class 9 Science MCQs Videos
CBSE Class 9 Hindi Chapter-wise Video Explanation
Class 8 English Lesson Explanation
Class 8 English MCQs
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 8
Class 8 Hindi Lesson Explanations
Class 8 Science Lesson Explanation
Class 8 English, History, Geography, and Civics MCQs
Class 8 Social Science Lesson Explanation
Class 7 English Lesson Explanation
Class 7 English Chapter wise Video Explanation
Class 7 History MCQs
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 7
CBSE Class 6 English Lesson Explanation
English Grammar Lessons
Essays in English 
Essays in Hindi
Hindi Grammar Lessons 
English Writing Skills 
Important Full Forms

					
		General			
Onam Wishes in Hindi
Happy Makar Sankrati Wishes in Hindi
Republic Day Wishes in Hindi
Happy Maha Shivratri Wishes in Hindi
Gudi Padwa Wishes in Hindi
Holika Dahan & Holi Wishes in Hindi
Basant Panchami / Saraswati puja wishes in Hindi
Happy Journey Wishes in Hindi
New Year Wishes in Hindi
Diwali Wishes in Hindi
Friendship Day Wishes in Hindi
Dussehra wishes in Hindi
Navratri Wishes in Hindi
Hindi Diwas Quotes in Hindi 
Congratulations Message in Hindi
Teacher’s Day Wishes in Hindi
Ganesh Chaturthi Wishes in Hindi
Janmashtami Messages in Hindi
Raksha Bandhan Wishes in Hindi
Birthday Wishes in Hindi
Anniversary Wishes in Hindi
Father’s Day Quotes and Messages
Father’s Day quotes in Hindi
International Yoga Day Slogans, Quotes and Sayings
अंतर्राष्ट्रीय योग दिवस Slogans, Quotes and Sayings
Good Morning Messages in Hindi
Good Night Messages in Hindi | शुभ रात्रि संदेश
Wedding Wishes in Hindi

 
 

		Tips and Tricks			Tips to score 95% in English paper
Tips for scoring full marks in Notice Writing question
Tips to score more in Speech writing question
Tips to score full marks in Formal letter writing question
Tips to Crack Class 10 Board Exams 2023
Ten tips on writing a good essay
Simple tips and tricks to score well in examinations
Tips for Developing Confidence
Quick Exam Tips and Tricks
Tips for Success in your Career
Exam Preparation Tips
Exam Stress Management Tips for Parents

					




			
		
	
	

	
			
		
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				CBSE School Lessons
			
					
					
					
					
					
						
						
							
								Class 12 English
Class 12 MCQ Test
Class 11 English
Class 11 MCQs Test
Class 10 English
Class 10 MCQs Test
Class 10 SST
Class 10 Science
Class 10 Hindi A
Class 10 Hindi B
Class 10 Sanskrit
Class 9 English
Class 9 English Communicative
Class 9 Science
Class 9 SST
Class 9 Hindi
Class 9 MCQs Test
Class 8 English
Class 8 Science
Class 8 Hindi
Class 8 SST

							
							
							
							
				
					
				
			
						
						
					
				
			
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
			
					
					
					
					
					
						
						
							
								Class 7 English
Class 7 Hindi
Class 6 English
Essay Writing in English
Essay Writing in Hindi
Learn English Grammar
Hindi Grammar
English Writing Skills
Hindi Writing Skills
BSEB Class 12 English
ICSE Class 10 English
BSEB Class 10 English
Maharashtra Class 10 English
JKBOSE Class 10 English
West Bengal Class 10 English
MAHA Class 9 English
WB Class 9 English
ICSE Class 9 English

							
							
							
							
				
					
				
			
						
						
					
				
			
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				Popular Pages
			
					
					
					
					
					
						
						
							
								Class 9 English Imp Questions
CBSE Class 10 Important Questions
Class 11 English Imp Questions
Class 12 English Imp Questions
Letter Writing Class 10
Letter Writing in Hindi
Report Writing
Analytical Paragraph
Notice Writing
Paragraph Writing
Email Lekhen
Letter to the Editor Examples

							
							
							
							
				
					
				
			
						
						
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
			
			
				
				
				
				
			
				
				
			
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
Contact Us      
About      
Privacy Policy          
  Disclaimer       
Sitemap

			
				
				
				
				
				Copyright © 2025 All Rights Reserved
