Class 10 English Previous Year Question Paper (2024) with Solutions






























		



























		










			
		
    
    
    
        



	

			
		
			
		
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
					
					
					
					
						
						
							
								Home
Latest Updates

	Latest Education News 2025-2026
	Major Changes in 2026 Board Exams
	Biannual CBSE Board Exams Starting 2026-27


Class 12

	Class 10 & Class 12 English 2026-27 Board Exam Success E-books
	CBSE English
	CBSE Class 12 Elective
	CBSE Hindi
	ISC Class 12 English
	BSEB English


Class 11

	CBSE English
	CBSE Hindi
	Class 11 English (Elective)


Class 10

	Class 10 English 2026 Board Exam Success Ebooks ( Both Courses)
	CBSE 10th English
	CBSE 10th English Communicative
	CBSE 10th Hindi A
	CBSE 10th Hindi B
	CBSE 10th Science
	CBSE 10th Social Sc
	CBSE 10th Sanskrit
	ICSE 10th English
	BSEB 10th English
	Maha Board 10th English
	West Bengal 10th English
	J&K Board 10th English
	JKBOSE Class 10 Hindi
	PSEB Class 10 Hindi Summary and Lesson Notes


Class 9

	CBSE Class 9 English
	CBSE Class 9 English Comm
	ICSE Class 9 English
	Maha Class 9 English
	West Bengal Class 9 English
	CBSE Class 9 Hindi
	CBSE Class 9 Hindi Course A
	CBSE Class 9 SST
	CBSE Class 9 Science


Class 8

	CBSE Class 8 English
	CBSE Class 8 Hindi
	CBSE Class 8 Science
	CBSE Class 8 SST


Class 7

	CBSE Class 7 English
	CBSE Class 7 Hindi


Class 6

	CBSE Class 6 English
	CBSE Class 6 Hindi


Others

	English Writing Skills
	English Grammar
	English Essays
	Hindi Lekhan Kaushal
	Hindi Vyakaran
	
		Rachna ke Aadhar Par Vakya Roopantar — Types, Examples | CBSE Class 10 Hindi vyakaran
	

	Hindi Niband Lekhan
	CUET 2025 Practice Tests
	Entrance Exams Practice Tests


PSEB Class 10 English Summaries and Notes
PSEB Class 12 English Summaries and Notes

							
							
							
							
				
					
				
			
						
						
					
				
			
				
				
				
				
			
				
				
			
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
			
			
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
					
						Search for:
						
						
						
						
						
						
					
				
			
			
				
				
				
				
			
				
				
					
	
	
	

		
		
			
											
											
							Class 10 English Previous Year Question Paper (2024) with Solutions

						 by Meenu Saini | Sep 16, 2024 | General | 0 comments
												
				
					
					 
CBSE Class 10 English Chapter-wise Previous Years Questions (2024) with Solution
 
Class 10 English Question Paper (2024) – Solved Question papers from previous years are very important for preparing for the CBSE Board Exams. It works as a treasure trove. It helps to prepare for the exam precisely. One of key benefits of solving question papers from past board exams is their ability to help identify commonly asked questions. These papers are highly beneficial study resources for students preparing for the upcoming class 10th board examinations. Here we have compiled chapter-wise questions asked in all the sets of CBSE Class 10 English question paper (2024).


 
First Flight Book

Chapter 1 – A Letter to God
 
Q1. What idea does the Postmaster come up with? What did he do to stick to his resolution? [40-50 words]
Ans. The postmaster wants to retain the farmer’s faith in God. Thus he decides to send him the money. However, he cannot arrange the money by himself and so, he collects it from colleagues in the post office. He puts the collected amount of 70 Pesos in an envelope and waits for Lencho’s visit.
 
Q2. Explain the irony in the chapter, “A Letter to God”. [40-50 words]
Ans. Lencho’s blind faith in God is ironical because he loses practicality. Lencho thinks that actually God has sent him the money to help him which is not possible. Also, Lencho is so innocent that he doubts the integrity of the staff of the post office as the envelope carries only seventy pesos against the hundred pesos that he had asked for. 
 
Q3. How far would you agree that one’s positivity can bring in a spark of brightness even in adverse circumstances? [40-50 words]
Ans. Being positive can undoubtedly bring a spark of brightness even in difficult times. It was Lencho’s positive attitude and faith in God which gave him hope despite having lost everything. Lencho still gathered courage to write a letter to God seeking his help so that he could feed the family and sow his field.
 
Q4. Grief or sadness is an emotion natural to all types of loss or significant change. You have been asked to present an analysis of the approaches of Lencho and Kisa Gotami in dealing with their respective losses. Write this presentation draft including your insights, and comparing the approaches of both.
You may begin like this : One acknowledges that Lencho had unwavering faith in God whereas Kisa Gotami in her grief, believed that her son ………..however ……… .
(Reference — A Letter to God and The Sermon at Benares) [100-120 words]
Ans. One acknowledges that Lencho had unwavering faith in God, whereas Kisa Gotami in her grief believed that her son could be brought back to life, however, finally, she realized the ultimate truth of life. Both Lencho and Kisa experience loss and grief but their loses are of different kinds. The loss of crop faced by Lencho can be made good with financial help. However, Kisa’s loss is the loss of her son which is irreparable. 
We also see that Lencho’s positive attitude and faith in God gave him courage. Despite not having any food for the entire year, he believed that God would help them and so, he wrote a letter to God for help. This shows him to be impractical because no one writes a letter to God seeking help, on the other hand, prayer is the mode to communicate with God. Lencho’s blind faith makes him overlook the help extended by the post office workers who act like messengers of God. He thinks that God has sent him the money.
Kisa Gotami is unable to bear her son’s untimely demise and carries the lifeless body looking for a cure to bring it back to life. However, when she is not able to find a household that has not lost a beloved, she realizes the truth behind humans being mortals and finds herself to be selfish in her love for her child. Thus, she accepts death as the truth of life.
Both approaches, though different in their methods and outcomes, highlight the complex and multifaceted nature of human response to loss.
 
Also See: 

A Letter to God Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
A Letter to God Summary, Explanation 
A Letter to God MCQs 
A Letter to God Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 2 – Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions :
(A) On the day of the inauguration, I was overwhelmed with a sense of history. In the first decade of the 20th century a few years after the bitter Anglo-Boer war and before my own birth, the white skinned people of South Africa patched up their differences and created a system of racial domination against the dark-skinned people of their own land. The structure they created formed the basis of one of the harshest, most inhumane societies the world has ever known. Now, in the last decade of the twentieth century, and my own eighth decade as a man, that system has been overturned forever and replaced by one that recognised the rights and freedoms of all peoples, regardless of the colour of their skin.
 
(i) Explain the feelings of the narrator when he said ; “I was overwhelmed with a sense of history.”
Ans. His mind was full of the happenings of the past, the struggle that they went through to make the day a reality.
 
(ii) The system of racial domination has been replaced by a system that:
(A) confirms the education of the Blacks.
(B) recognises the rights and freedoms of all people.
(C) recollects the bitter experiences.
(D) focuses on the personality development.
Ans. (B) recognises the rights and freedoms of all people.
 
(iii) Comment on the kind of society apartheid had created.
Ans. A Harsh and inhumane society had been created.
 
(iv) Which phrase would correctly substitute ‘patched up’ in the given sentence from the extract:
“….the white skinned people of South Africa patched up their differences…”
Ans. repaired
 
(B) Tenth May dawned bright and clear. For the past few days, I had been pleasantly besieged by dignitaries and world leaders who were coming to pay their respects before the inauguration. The inauguration would be the largest gathering ever of international leaders on South African soil. The ceremonies took place in the lovely sandstone amphitheatre formed by the Union buildings in Pretoria. For decades this had been the seat of white supremacy, and now it was the site of rainbow gathering of different colours and nations for the installation of South Africa’s first democratic non-racial government.
(Nelson Mandela — Long Walk to Freedom)
 
(i) What do you infer from the following statement?
“The inauguration would be the largest gathering ever of international leaders on South African Soil.”
Ans. For the first time in the history of South Africa, the ceremony was attended by the maximum number of dignitaries from all around the world. 
 
(ii) Explain in about 40 words the effective shift from white supremacy to a rainbow gathering.
Ans. Before that day of inauguration, South Africa was being ruled by the Whites and the Black population was subjected to a system of discrimination called Apartheid. The entire world had delinked itself from the country. But on that day, as a mark of solidarity with the people, world leaders had arrived in South Africa for the ceremony. Thus, there was a shift from the white supremacy to a gathering of rainbow colours.
 
(iii) Which phrase would correctly substitute ‘pleasantly besieged’ in the given sentence from that extract?
Ans. delightful to be surrounded by
 
(iv) State true or false with reference to the given extract.
In the past the ‘amphitheatre’ had been a seat for theatrical performances.
Ans. False
 
(C) We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation. We pledge ourselves to liberate all our people from the continuing bondage of poverty, deprivation, suffering, gender and other discrimination.
Never, never, and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one by another.
The sun shall never set on so glorious a human achievement.
Let freedom reign. God bless Africa!
(Nelson Mandela — Long Walk to Freedom)
 
(i) ‘State any one inference about Nelson Mandela from the given context:
“We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation.”
Ans. He wanted the political freedom of the entire population of South Africa.
 
(ii) State True or False :
When Mandela says, “God bless Africa”, he intends to mean well-being and welfare of only black people in South Africa.
Ans. False
 
(iii) “Nelson Mandela’s speech is full of optimism.” Elaborate in about 40 words with reference to the extract.
Ans. His speech shows his positive attitude when he says that the land will never again face such oppression. The people of the country shall live free forever. He also vows to free the populace from the shackles of poverty, suffering and discrimination.
 
(iv) Which phrase would correctly substitute ‘so glorious’, in the given sentence from the extract.
“The sun shall never set on so glorious a human achievement.”
Ans. “The sun shall never set on such a glorious human achievement.”
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. Nelson Mandela in his inauguration speech says, “We, who were outlaws not so long ago, have today been given the rare privilege to be host to the nations of the world on our own soil.”
What is the significance of this statement with reference to the political system that prevailed before this? [40-50 words]
Ans. Earlier, the White supremacy in South Africa had founded a system of supremacy and people like Mandela who fought for the freedom of the masses were considered outlaws and were punished. However, with the end of that system, now a democratic government was being set up and thus, these freedom fighters were now considered as the harbingers of this freedom. Thus, now these so called outlaws became the frontrunners of the nation who were hosting the world leaders on the occasion of the swearing-in ceremony.
 
Q2. In the chapter ‘A Baker from Goa’ the narrator talks about his childhood in Goa and his fond memories. In about 120 words write a presentation draft comparing the childhood of the narrator in ‘A Baker from Goa’ to that of Nelson Mandela.
You may begin this way:
Childhood memories remind us of the days gone by…..
Reference : A Baker from Goa and Nelson Mandela : Long Walk [120 words]
Ans. Childhood memories remind us of the days gone by. The author of the story A Baker from Goa reminisces the good old days when he lived in Goa. He elaborates ablout the lazy mornings when they would meet the baker who visited twice a day to sell baked goods. The kids would look for the favourite bread bangles, eat them without brushing their teeth. The entire story is filled with nostalgia where we get to know the importance of a baker in Goan households. The baker was like a friend, companion and guide to the narrator. He also throws light on the significance of baked items in Goan culture which makes the baker an essential part of the community. Thus, the narrator shares sweet memories of his childhood. 
Nelson Mandela’s childhood was also full of freedom. He was free to do whatever he wished for. Like run in the fields, swim in the stream, roast mealies under the night sky and ride the bulls. He also has sweet memories of his childhood when he enjoyed the freedom to do follow his heart. All he was expected was to obey his father and follow the rules of his tribe. 
Thus, we notice that both of them are nostalgic about their childhood. They miss the good old days when they had a carefree life. 
 
Q3. A desire is more personal whereas a vision has broader connotations. You have been asked to present an analysis of Valli’s desire and Mandela’s vision and how they are respectively fulfilled. Write this presentation draft including your insights, in about 120 words, comparing the approaches of both Valli and Mandela.
You may begin like this :
One acknowledges that both, Valli and Mandela however, (Reference — Nelson Mandela — A Long Walk to Freedom & Madam Rides a Bus)  [120 words]
Ans. One acknowledges that both Valli and Mandela were able to achieve their goals. Valli had a desire to go on a bus ride. Being a mature girl, Valli left no stone unturned to undergo a successful outing. The readers are in awe of her wisdom, gracefulness and intelligence which helped her gather all information about the trip, make the necessary arrangements for the bus ride and also, make a safe bus journey and return home securely. Thus, she was able to fulfil her dream.
Nelson Mandela envisioned a free populace in his country. He wanted justice and equality for the people of the nation. His vision was beyond personal desires and he felt pain for all the countrymen. He struggled for a long period of almost thirty years in order to end racial discrimination and set up the first democratic government in the country. His persistence is an inspiration for us. The readers get to know that the real diamonds of the country are the numerous freedom fighters whose struggle finally made the country free. 
Thus, we see that both the characters display strong qualities that helped them in their endeavours. A strong character is the foundation of success. 
 
Also See: 

Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom Summary, Explanation 
Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom MCQs 
Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 3 – Two Stories About Flying (Part 1 – His First Flight)
 
Q1. Briefly bring out the contrast between the young seagull’s initial attempts to fly and his first successful flight. [40-50 words]
Ans. The young seagull lacks courage and fears that his wings will not be able to support him. He watches his siblings soar and dive but he is unable to overcome the fear. The family abandons him and it is only when he is starving from hunger that the sight of fish in his mother’s beak excites him and he takes the first flight. He is initially terrified but realizes that he is able to fly and then, flies confidently.
 
Q2. Flying is a natural act in birds. Then why was the young seagull ‘exhausted by the strange exercise’? Justify the given statement with reference to baby seagull’s fear. [40-50 words]
Ans. The young seagull was a coward. He lacked courage and feared that he would fall and hit the ground. The wings might not be strong enough to bear his weight. Thus, he was not able to fly.
 
Q3. You have been asked to present an evaluation of the approaches of both, the Baby Seagull and the Pilot who was lost in the clouds, towards achieving their dreams of conquering the skies.
Write this presentation draft including your insights, comparing the approaches of both.
You may begin this way : One acknowledges that both, the Seagull and the Pilot, wanted to ……………however, ……………. .
(Reference : Two Stories About Flying)  [100-120 words]
Ans. Both the pilot and the baby seagull overcame the challenge and conquered the skies. 
The baby seagull had to overcome personal limitations of fear and cowardice. When he got extremely hungry, he just leapt at the fish carried by his mother and later realized that he was flying. Then it was no looking back as the baby bird soared high in the sky. 
On the other hand, the pilot had to encounter failed radar and compass. The plane was running out of fuel and its mechanism had stopped working. Still, the pilot was guided by the lights of the runway and he relied on his instincts to land to safety. 
From both these experiences we observe that it is one’s own strengths and positive traits that help one achieve success. We have to face the hurdle and conquer it like the seagull and pilot did. 
 
Q4. Valli was sensitive, but at the same time, she was fearless and quite determined. Think of another character from your text book, who displayed similar character traits.
Compare and contrast the lives of Valli and the other character, that you have chosen from the text of Two Stories about Flying.
You may begin this way.
The characters who are fearless and determined from two texts are Valli and _______.
(Reference : Madam Rides a Bus & Two Stories about Flying) [100-120 words]
Ans. The characters who are fearless and determined from two texts are Valli and the pilot. Valli is a young girl but she is quiet fearless. She fulfils her desire of going on a bus ride all by herself. She is not afraid of meeting strangers or going on a trip that is new to her. She is determined to fulfil her desire through her own means. She saves pocket money by resisting temptations and thus, buys the bus tickets. She asks discreet questions from the passengers to know the bus route and timings. She decides the trip timing suitable to her according to the period when her mother takes a nap. She avoids talking to strangers in the bus and dislikes being treated like a child. She guards herself against the friendly bus conductor and refuses his offer of buying her a cold drink. All these qualities assist Valli in fulfilling her desire successfully. The pilot is also determined to reach home and have an English breakfast with his family. Thus he does not think twice and flies straight into the storm clouds. He gets alarmed when the compass and radar stop working but still, he remains fearless. The mysterious black aeroplane is his mind’s product and his mind only guides him towards the runway. 
Both these characters highlight the importance of self-belief, determination and fearlessness in the face of dangerous situations.
 
Also See:  

Two Stories About Flying (Part 1 – His First Flight) Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Two Stories About Flying (Part 1 – His First Flight) Summary, Explanation 
Two Stories About Flying (Part 1 – His First Flight) MCQs 
Two Stories About Flying (Part 1 – His First Flight) Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 4 – From the Diary of Anne Frank
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
(A) I started right away at the Montessori Nursery School. I stayed there until I was six, at which time I started in the first form. In the sixth form, my teacher was Mrs. Kuperus, the headmistress. At the end of the year we were both in tears as we said a heartbreaking farewell. In the summer of 1941, Grandma fell ill and had to have an operation, so my birthday passed with little celebration.
 
(i) “In the summer of 1941, Grandma fell ill and had to have an operation, so my birthday passed with little celebration.”
State any one inference about Anne from the above context.
Ans. Anne was attached to her grand mother.
 
(ii) The first education of Anne started at ___________.
(A) some Kindergarten School
(B) a Nursery School
(C) Montessori Nursery School
(D) Elementary School
Ans. (C) Montessori Nursery School
 
(iii) Who was Mrs. Kuperus? What kind of relationship did Anne share with her?
Ans. She was Anne’s teacher in the Sixth form and also the headmistress. Both were attached to each other.
 
(iv) Substitute the word ‘heartbreaking’ with a word similar in meaning in the following sentence:
“At the end of the year we were both in tears as we said a heartbreaking farewell.”
Ans. emotional
 
(B) Anyone could ramble on and leave big spaces between the words, but the trick was to come up with convincing arguments to prove the necessity of talking. I thought and suddenly I had an idea. I wrote the three pages, Mr. Keesing had assigned me and was satisfied. I argued that talking is a students’ trait and that I would do my best to keep it under control, but that I would never be able to cure myself of the habit since my mother talked as much as I did if not more, and that there’s not much you can do about inherited traits. (From the Diary of Annie Frank)
 
(i) State any one inference about Anne from the given context.
“Anyone could ramble on and leave big spaces between the words, but the trick was to come up with convincing arguments to prove the necessity of talking.”
Ans. She wants to make logical arguments
 
(ii) In about 40 words, elaborate on the justification Anne gives for her talkative nature.
Ans. Anne says that she can do nothing about her talkative nature because she has inherited the trait from her mother. 
 
(iii) Which one of the following best describes the tone of the given extract?
(A) derogatory (B) persuasive
(C) nostalgic (D) cautionary
Ans. (B) persuasive
 
(iv) Which phrase would correctly substitute ‘ramble on’ in the given sentence from the extract ?
Ans. The alternative phrase that could substitute ‘ramble on’ in the given sentence is ‘talk aimlessly’.
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. You have been chosen to address the school assembly on the occasion of Women’s Day. You choose to speak on the resilience and indomitable spirit of the young girls: Anne Frank and Valli. Prepare the speech draft, with reference to the commonality and contrast in the situations and circumstances of both the girls.
(Madam Rides the Bus and From the Diary of Anne Frank)
You may begin like this: Good morning everyone. Today, I’d like to express my insights on the resilience of two young girls ……….. .
You may end this way : To conclude I’d like to say that ……………… .
Thank you. [100-120 words]
Ans. Good morning everyone. Today, I’d like to express my insights on the resilience of two young girls Anne and Valli. 
Anne and Valli are lonely and do not have any friends. Anne’s desire to share her deepest feelings with a close friend makes her write her feelings in a diary which she calls her friend ‘Kitty’. Valli spends her time watching the street outside her house and is attracted to the bus which crosses the street as it goes from the village to the town and vice versa. She develops a desire to take the bus ride and does a lot of work to make it a success. 
When Anne faces a challenge of writing an assignment as a punishment for her talking in the Maths class, she accepts it and presents valid arguments and reasons that it is beyond her control. She successfully convinces the Maths teacher Mr Keesing who becomes jovial and stops pointing out Anne. When Valli encounters strangers and the over friendly bus conductor, she is on guard and does not accept any favours. When she sees the dead cow who had been running around sometime back, she learns an important lesson about the momentary nature of life.
To conclude I’d like to say that both Anne and Valli are mature for their age. Both the girls are strong and fight their battles by themselves.
Thank you.
 
Q2. Based on your understanding of the Play, ‘The Proposal’, what do you think of relationships?
Prepare a speech draft on relationships based on Natalya’s and Anne Frank’s characters.
You may begin this way.
Good morning everyone.
Relationships are the bond between two people based on mutual likes, understanding, need or love. I’d like to discuss relationships as portrayed in the two texts ……..
You may end this way
To conclude, I’d like to say that ….. .
Thank you,
(Reference : The Proposal & from the Diary of Anne Frank) [100-120 words]
Ans. Good morning everyone.
Relationships are the bond between two people based on mutual likes, understanding, need or love. I’d like to discuss relationships as portrayed in the two texts The Proposal and From the Diary of Anne Frank. 
In The Proposal, we see the two characters of Natalya and Lomov who are grown up individuals but lack maturity. They enter into arguments on trivial matters and overlook the solemn relationship that they are about to enter into. This reflects their england pride which does not allow them to show affection towards each other. Thus, both of them try to show the other low.
On the other hand, Anne Frank is a young girl who shows maturity through her diary entries. We get to know about the bond that she shares with her family. She has great attachment with her grandmother and did not even celebrate her birthday due to the grandmother’s illness. During the war, the family faces separation and a lot of trouble but they have the strength to support each other. 
To conclude, I’d like to say that relationships have to be maintained through understanding and affection. Mutual love and respect are the pillars of an everlasting relationship. Creating everlasting bonds is essential because a family is the biggest treasure.
Thank you
 
Q3. Amanda from the poem ‘Amanda’ is a teenager like Anne Frank and lives in her fantasy world whereas Anne is a chatter box. What conversation will Anne Frank have with Amanda about different perspectives of life? Write your answer in about 120 words. [120 words]
Ans. As Anne is talkative in nature, she will start a conversation with Amanda. When Anne will come to know that Amanda is disturbed due to her mother’s constant nagging, Anne will understand her situation. Anne is a wise and mature girl. She will try to convince Amanda that her mother is scolding her for Amanda’s benefit. Anne will also advice her to think positively because parents think the best for their child. Anne will be sympathetic towards Amanda and she can also suggest that whenever Amanda’s mom scolds her, Amanda can try to justify her act just like Anne did with her Maths teacher. To conclude, Anne will sum up that Amanda should think positively and if she is justified for her acts, then she should come up with intelligent arguments to support her claim and try to convince her mother.
 
Q4. You have been chosen to address the school assembly, to speak on the epistemology of loss and the resilience of the human spirit during times of crisis. Prepare the speech draft, with reference to the commonality of themes in ‘The Ball Poem’ by John Berryman and ‘From the Diary of Anne Frank’.
You may begin this way :
Good morning everyone.
Today, I’d like to discuss two pieces of literature that offer a powerful insight into how to deal with loss and the resilience of the human spirit required during times of crisis.
You may end this way :
To conclude, I’d like to say that ………….. . Thank you. [100-120 words]
Ans. Good morning everyone.
Today, I’d like to discuss two pieces of literature that offer a powerful insight into how to deal with loss and the resilience of the human spirit required during times of crisis. In the poem titled the Ball Poem by John Berryman and the prose titled From the Diary of Anne Frank, the main character learns to cope up with loss and tells us about resilience when she and her family faced trouble. 
In The Ball poem the child loses his ball and the poet tells the boy that he has to learn how to handle loss and move ahead in life. He adds that gradually, the boy will cope up with the fact that his ball is lost forever and shall learn to bear losses.
Anne Frank’s diary talks of the various times when she displayed courage and faced challenges with resilience.  
To conclude, I’d like to say that both pieces remind us that while loss is inevitable, our ability to endure and grow from it defines our resilience as individuals.
Thank You
 
Also See:   

From the Diary of Anne Frank Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
From the Diary of Anne Frank Summary, Explanation 
From the Diary of Anne Frank MCQs 
From the Diary of Anne Frank Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 5 – Glimpses of India (Part 1 – A Baker from Goa) 
 
Q1. The baker and his family never starved. Elaborate. [40-50 words]
Ans. Bakery was a profitable profession because baked goods were an essential part of the Goan tradition. The baker would visit each and every house, twice a day. Bread and other baked goods were staple diet of Goans. The bakers had a Jackfruit-like belly which indicated prosperity. 
 
Q2. “During our childhood in Goa, the baker used to be our friend, companion and guide.” What does this statement imply in relation to the character of the baker? [40-50 words]
OR
The author says – ‘During our childhood in Goa, the baker used to be our friend, companion and guide.’ Elaborate. [40-50 words]
Ans. This tells us that a baker was a respected person. He was well-learned and so, the people sought his advice and confided their secrets in him. He visited the households everyday and supplied freshly baked goods. Some of them were essential part of various festivals and traditions and so, a baker was like a family member in Goan families.
 
Q3. Why does the author say that the presence of the Baker’s furnace in the village is absolutely essential? Justify with reference to “A Baker from Goa”. [40-50 words]
Ans. The author says this to suggest that in Goa, there was a bakery in every village. This indicates the importance of baked goods in Goan cuisine. Various preparations were part of festivals and occasions. Cakes and bolinhas for Christmas, sandwiches for the daughter’s engagement, wedding gifts included bol. As a child, the author would have bread bangles every morning. Thus, the presence of a baker’s furnace in every village is justified.
 
Q4. In the chapter ‘A Baker from Goa’ the narrator talks about his childhood in Goa and his fond memories. In about 120 words write a presentation draft comparing the childhood of the narrator in ‘A Baker from Goa’ to that of Nelson Mandela.
You may begin this way :
Childhood memories remind us of the days gone by…..
Reference : A Baker from Goa and Nelson Mandela : Long Walk [120 words]
Ans.  Childhood memories remind us of the days gone by. The author of the story A Baker from Goa reminisces the good old days when he lived in Goa. He elaborates about the lazy mornings when they would meet the baker who visited twice a day to sell baked goods. The kids would look for the favourite bread bangles, eat them without brushing their teeth. The entire story is filled with nostalgia where we get to know the importance of a baker in Goan households. The baker was like a friend, companion and guide to the narrator. He also throws light on the significance of baked items in Goan culture which makes the baker an essential part of the community. Thus, the narrator shares sweet memories of his childhood. 
Nelson Mandela’s childhood was also full of freedom. He was free to do whatever he wished for. Like run in the fields, swim in the stream, roast mealies under the night sky and ride the bulls. He also has sweet memories of his childhood when he enjoyed the freedom to do follow his heart. All he was expected was to obey his father and follow the rules of his tribe. 
Thus, we notice that both of them are nostalgic about their childhood. They miss the good old days when they had a carefree life. 
 
Also See: 

Glimpses of India (Part 1 – A Baker from Goa) Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Glimpses of India (Part 1 – A Baker from Goa) Summary, Explanation 
Glimpses of India (Part 1 – A Baker from Goa) MCQs 
Glimpses of India (Part 1 – A Baker from Goa) Character Sketches

 
Chapter 5 – Glimpses of India (Part 2 – Coorg) 
 
Q1. The most laid back individuals become converts to the life of high-energy adventure. Elaborate with reference to Coorg. [40-50 words]
Ans. Coorg has abundance of serene landscapes and coffee plantations. One can participate in adventure sports like trekking and biking in the forests, river rafting and canoeing in the wild waters of river Kaveri, rock climbing and mountaineering on the Brahmagiri hills. There are several attractive options that even the most laid back individuals can feels energised and get tempted to participate. 
 
Q2. Coorg has been defined as a ‘piece of heaven’ by the writer. Justify. [40-50 words]
Ans. Coorg has been defined as a piece of heaven because of the stunning natural beauty. The rolling hills, lush coffee plantations, colonial bungalows tucked under tree canopies and an abundance of flora and fauna. There are cascading waterfalls, walking trails, a panoramic view from the Brahmagiri hills. One can visit the island Nisargadhama via a rope bridge and also visit India’s largest Tibetan settlement of Bylakuppe.
 
Q3. “Coorgi homes have a tradition of hospitality, and they are more than willing to recount numerous tales of valour related to their sons and fathers.”
Elaborate with reference to the chapter “Glimpses of India”. [40-50 words]
Ans. The people of Coorg are fierce and brave. The families have a tradition of hospitality. The Coorg regiment of the Indian Army is the most decorated and General Cariappa, the first Chief of the Indian Army was a Coorgi. The fact that the Coorgis are the only race that are permitted to carry firearms without a licence establishes their valour and bravery.
 
Also See: 

Glimpses of India (Part 2 – Coorg) Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Glimpses of India (Part 2 – Coorg) Summary, Explanation 
Glimpses of India (Part 2 – Coorg) MCQs 

 
Chapter 5 – Glimpses of India (Part 3 – Tea from Assam) 
 
Read the given extracts and answer the questions :
The train pulled out of the station — Pranjol buried his nose in his detective book again. Rajvir too was an ardent fan of detective stories but, at the moment he was keener on looking at the beautiful scenery. It was green, green everywhere. Rajvir had never seen so much greenery before. Then the soft green paddy fields gave way to tea bushes. It was a magnificent view. Against the backdrop of densely wooded hills a sea of tea bushes stretched as far as the eye could see. Dwarfing the tiny tea plants were tall, sturdy, shade-trees and amidst the orderly rows of bushes busily moved doll-like figures.
(Glimpses of India — Tea from Assam)
 
(i) State any one inference about Rajvir from the given context: 
“Rajvir too was an ardent fan of detective stories, but at the moment he was keen on looking at the beautiful scenery.”
Ans. Rajvir was ecstatic and fascinated by the scenery that he saw outside that he kept on admiring it instead of reading his favourite detective stories.
 
(ii) State True or False : 
The reason Rajvir was interested in looking at the beautiful scenery was that the detective book he was reading, was not interesting.
Ans. False
 
(iii) People who live in big cities are always fascinated by the natural beauty and abundant greenery. Elaborate in about 40 words, with reference to the extract.
Ans. People who live in big cities often find natural beauty and abundant greenery fascinating because they are usually surrounded by concrete structures and urban landscapes. The sight of vast green fields and scenic views provides a refreshing contrast to their usual environment, evoking a sense of peace and wonder.
 
(iv) Which phrase would correctly substitute ‘doll-like figures’, in the given sentence from the extract?
Dwarfing the tiny tea plants were tall sturdy shade-trees and amidst the orderly rows of bushes busily moved doll-like figures.
Ans. Tiny women
 
Also See:  

Glimpses of India (Part 3 – Tea from Assam) Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Glimpses of India (Part 3 – Tea from Assam) Summary, Explanation 
Glimpses of India (Part 3 – Tea from Assam) MCQs 
Glimpses of India (Part 3 – Tea from Assam) Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 6 – Mijbil the Otter
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
For the first twenty-four hours, Mijbil was neither hostile nor friendly; he was simply aloof and indifferent, choosing to sleep on the floor as far from my bed as possible. The second night Mijbil came on to my bed in the small hours and remained asleep in the crook of my knees until the servant brought tea in the morning, and during the day he began to lose his apathy and take a keen, much too keen, interest in his surroundings. I made a body-belt for him and took him on a lead to the bathroom, where for half an hour he went wild with joy in the water. (Mijbil the Otter)
 
(i) Which of the following is not a reason why Mijbil came on to Maxwell’s bed in the small hours?
(A) He had started taking interest in his surroundings.
(B) He was becoming friendly with Maxwell.
(C) He wanted to play with Maxwell on his bed.
(D) He wanted to feel safe and not remain indifferent.
Ans. (C)
 
(ii) Maxwell says that Mijbil was neither hostile nor friendly, he was simply aloof and indifferent for the first twenty-four hours. Give reasons in not more than 40 words.
Ans. Mijbil was in unfamiliar surroundings, he needed time to adjust and feel comfortable around Maxwell, thus initially showing indifference and aloofness as a natural response to the change in his setting.
 
(iii) Read the following descriptions (A) — (D) and identify which one correctly corresponds to the extract.
(A) Owning a pet is tedious and needs commitment.
(B) A pet needs his own space and time to get adjusted to his owner’s environment.
(C) Maxwell decided to bring Mijbil because he was very sad to lose his dog.
(D) Maxwell and Mijbil loved travelling.
Ans. (B)
 
(iv) Which characteristic trait of otters is revealed when Mijbil is taken to the bathroom?
Ans. Joy in water
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. Mijbil turned out to be a playful pet. Elaborate. [40-50 words]
Ans. Mijbil was a playful pet. It enjoyed playing with water, marbles and ping-pong balls. While out for a walk, it would run along the wall of the school and gain the attention of the teachers and students. It was lively and engaging.
 
Q2. Maxwell decides to keep an otter as a pet. Elucidate with reference to the fact that owning a pet is a life of commitment. [40-50 words]
Ans. Keeping a pet requires commitment. The pet is dependant on the master and so, one has to take care of it at all times. When Mijbil played with water in the bathroom, Maxwell had to take care the pet did not drown. Once when he left Mijbil unattended, the pet hurt itself and bled. The author had to change the airline because some of them did not fly animals. During the flight, Maxwell endured hardships due to Mijbil’s recklessness. Thus, Maxwell had to be highly committed to Mijbil.
 
Also See:  

Mijbil the Otter Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Mijbil the Otter Summary, Explanation 
Mijbil the Otter MCQs 
Mijbil the Otter Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 7 – Madam Rides the Bus
 
Q1. A desire is more personal whereas a vision has broader connotations. You have been asked to present an analysis of Valli’s desire and Mandela’s vision and how they are respectively fulfilled. Write this presentation draft including your insights, in about 120 words, comparing the approaches of both Valli and Mandela.
You may begin like this :
One acknowledges that both, Valli and Mandela however, (Reference — Nelson Mandela — A Long Walk to Freedom & Madam Rides a Bus) [120 words]
Ans. One acknowledges that both Valli and Mandela were able to achieve their goals. Valli had a desire to go on a bus ride. Being a mature girl, Valli left no stone unturned to undergo a successful outing. The readers are in awe of her wisdom, gracefulness and intelligence which helped her gather all information about the trip, make the necessary arrangements for the bus ride and also, make a safe bus journey and return home securely. Thus, she was able to fulfil her dream.
Nelson Mandela envisioned a free populace in his country. He wanted justice and equality for the people of the nation. His vision was beyond personal desires and he felt pain for all the countrymen. He struggled for a long period of almost thirty years in order to end racial discrimination and set up the first democratic government in the country. His persistence is an inspiration for us. The readers get to know that the real diamonds of the country are the numerous freedom fighters whose struggle finally made the country free. 
Thus, we see that both the characters display strong qualities that helped them in their endeavours. A strong character is the foundation of success. 
 
Q2. Valli was sensitive, but at the same time, she was fearless and quite determined. Think of another character from your text book, who displayed similar character traits.
Compare and contrast the lives of Valli and the other character, that you have chosen from the text of Two Stories about Flying.
You may begin this way.
The characters who are fearless and determined from two texts are Valli and _______.
(Reference : Madam Rides a Bus & Two Stories about Flying) [100-120 words]
Ans. The characters who are fearless and determined from two texts are Valli and the pilot. Valli is a young girl but she is quiet fearless. She fulfils her desire of going on a bus ride all by herself. She is not afraid of meeting strangers or going on a trip that is new to her. She is determined to fulfil her desire through her own means. She saves pocket money by resisting temptations and thus, buys the bus tickets. She asks discreet questions from the passengers to know the bus route and timings. She decides the trip timing suitable to her according to the period when her mother takes a nap. She avoids talking to strangers in the bus and dislikes being treated like a child. She guards herself against the friendly bus conductor and refuses his offer of buying her a cold drink. All these qualities assist Valli in fulfilling her desire successfully. The pilot is also determined to reach home and have an English breakfast with his family. Thus he does not think twice and flies straight into the storm clouds. He gets alarmed when the compass and radar stop working but still, he remains fearless. The mysterious black aeroplane is his mind’s product and his mind only guides him towards the runway. 
Both these characters highlight the importance of self-belief, determination and fearlessness in the face of dangerous situations.
 
Q3. You have been chosen to address the school assembly on the occasion of Women’s Day. You choose to speak on the resilience and indomitable spirit of the young girls : Anne Frank and Valli. Prepare the speech draft, with reference to the commonality and contrast in the situations and circumstances of both the girls.
(Madam Rides the Bus and From the Diary of Anne Frank)
You may begin like this: Good morning everyone. Today, I’d like to express my insights on the resilience of two young girls ……….. .
You may end this way : To conclude I’d like to say that ……………… .
Thank you. [100-120 words]
Ans. Good morning everyone. Today, I’d like to express my insights on the resilience of two young girls Anne and Valli. 
Anne and Valli are lonely and do not have any friends. Anne’s desire to share her deepest feelings with a close friend makes her write her feelings in a diary which she calls her friend ‘Kitty’. Valli spends her time watching the street outside her house and is attracted to the bus which crosses the street as it goes from the village to the town and vice versa. She develops a desire to take the bus ride and does a lot of work to make it a success. 
When Anne faces a challenge of writing an assignment as a punishment for her talking in the Maths class, she accepts it and presents valid arguments and reasons that it is beyond her control. She successfully convinces the Maths teacher Mr Keesing who becomes jovial and stops pointing out Anne. When Valli encounters strangers and the over friendly bus conductor, she is on guard and does not accept any favours. When she sees the dead cow who had been running around sometime back, she learns an important lesson about the momentary nature of life.
To conclude I’d like to say that both Anne and Valli are mature for their age. Both the girls are strong and fight their battles by themselves.
Thank you.
 
Also See:  

Madam Rides the Bus Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Madam Rides the Bus Summary, Explanation 
Madam Rides the Bus MCQs 
Madam Rides the Bus Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 8 – The Sermon at Benares
 
Q1. What message might the Buddha’s story hold for those who are in positions of power and privilege? [40-50 words]
Ans. The story imparts the message that death is the ultimate truth and is common to all irrespective of power and privilege. Every human is a mortal and all power, wealth and relatives are left behind.
 
Q2. You have been chosen to address the student gathering from the nearby schools, to speak on “How to Deal with Loss — Personal or Material”. Prepare the speech draft in not more than 120 words, with reference to the commonality of themes in John Benyman’s.
‘The Ball Poem’ and ‘A Sermon at Benaras’.
You may begin this way.
Good Morning everyone. Today, I’d like to discuss two pieces of literature that offer a powerful insight into how we can learn to deal with loss.
You may end in this way —
To conclude, I’d like to say that —
Thank you. [120 words]
Ans. Good morning everyone.
Today, I’d like to discuss two pieces of literature that offer a powerful insight into how we can learn to deal with loss. John Berryman’s poems, “The Ball Poem” and “A Sermon at Benares,” both explore themes of loss, whether it’s the loss of innocence, loved ones, or material things.
The young boy loses his ball and watches as it bounces and lands into the stream. He stands frozen because he cannot accept the separation from his possession. The poet comments that slowly, the boy will learn to accept loses and would cope up with the grief.
Kisa Gotami cannot bear the death of her son. When she fails to find a house that has not suffered the pain of losing a beloved to death, she realizes that she had been selfish in her love. Thus, she accepts the temporal nature of human life. She accepts the loss of her son and comes out of the sadness.
To conclude, I’d like to say that embracing these lessons can help us navigate our own losses with courage and wisdom.
Thank you.
 
Q3. Grief or sadness is an emotion natural to all types of loss or significant change. You have been asked to present an analysis of the approaches of Lencho and Kisa Gotami in dealing with their respective losses. Write this presentation draft including your insights, and comparing the approaches of both.
You may begin like this : One acknowledges that Lencho had unwavering faith in God whereas Kisa Gotami in her grief, believed that her son ………..however ……… .
(Reference — A Letter to God and The Sermon at Benares) [100-120 words]
Ans. One acknowledges that Lencho had unwavering faith in God, whereas Kisa Gotami in her grief believed that her son could be brought back to life, however, finally, she realized the ultimate truth of life. Both Lencho and Kisa experience loss and grief but their loses are of different kinds. The loss of crop faced by Lencho can be made good with financial help. However, Kisa’s loss is the loss of her son which is irreparable. 
We also see that Lencho’s positive attitude and faith in God gave him courage. Despite not having any food for the entire year, he believed that God would help them and so, he wrote a letter to God for help. This shows him to be impractical because no one writes a letter to God seeking help, on the other hand, prayer is the mode to communicate with God. Lencho’s blind faith makes him overlook the help extended by the post office workers who act like messengers of God. He thinks that God has sent him the money.
Kisa Gotami is unable to bear her son’s untimely demise and carries the lifeless body looking for a cure to bring it back to life. However, when she is not able to find a household that has not lost a beloved, she realizes the truth behind humans being mortals and finds herself to be selfish in her love for her child. Thus, she accepts death as the truth of life.
Both approaches, though different in their methods and outcomes, highlight the complex and multifaceted nature of human response to loss.
 
Also See:   

The Sermon at Benares Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Sermon at Benares Summary, Explanation 
The Sermon at Benares MCQs 
The Sermon at Benares Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 9 – The Proposal
 
Q1. “Oh, what a burden, Lord, to be the father of a grown-up daughter!”
Explain what this line conveys about Chubukov as a father. [40-50 words]
Ans. The line indicates that a father faces challenges while fulfilling his responsibility towards a grown-up daughter. Chubukov has to perform his parental duty but his daughter has a mind of her own. So, this clash makes him feel burdened.
 
Q2. What argument do Lomov and Natalya give over the superiority of their dogs, Guess and Squeezer? [40-50 words]
Ans. Lomov and Natalya argue vehemently over their dogs, Guess and Squeezer. Lomov insists that Squeezer is superior, praising his pedigree and hunting abilities, while Natalya defends Guess, asserting his superiority in hunting and dismisses Squeezer’s qualities. Their argument escalates into a larger conflict, reflecting their competitive nature and underlying tensions, symbolizing their complex relationship dynamics and the trivialities that can disrupt human connections.
 
Q3. Lomov and Natalya trade charges against each other about the ownership of Meadows. Explain. [40-50 words]
Ans. Both of them claim the ownership of the Oxen Meadows. Lomov claims that his aunt’s grandmother had given the meadows for free use to Natalya’s father’s grandfather in return for making bricks for her. They used it for forty years and got used to regard them as their own. Natalya refutes the claim and says that her grandfather and great grandfather had claimed that their land extended up to Burnt marsh which meant that Oxen Meadows were theirs. 
 
Q4. Justify the title of the play ‘The Proposal’ with reference to the characters and plot. [40-50 words]
Ans. The title of the play ‘The Proposal’ is very appropriate. A young man, Lomov wants to propose Natalya for marriage. He goes to her house for the same. Being confused, he doesn’t propose at once. He beats about the bush. He speaks irrelevantly. As Natalya doesn’t know that he has come to propose her, she thinks that he has come to claim oxen meadows as his own and she starts quarrelling. This results in a series of fights between both of them. After her father Chubukov reconciles; Natalya comes to know that Lomov has come to propose to her. Then at once she forgets the issue of fighting. Then the proposal is made and accepted. Finally, they get engaged.
 
Q5. Based on your understanding of the Play, ‘The Proposal’, what do you think of relationships?
Prepare a speech draft on relationships based on Natalya’s and Anne Frank’s characters.
You may begin this way.
Good morning everyone.
Relationships are the bond between two people based on mutual likes, understanding, need or love. I’d like to discuss relationships as portrayed in the two texts ……..
You may end this way
To conclude, I’d like to say that ….. .
Thank you,
(Reference : The Proposal & from the Diary of Anne Frank) [100-120 words]
Ans.  Good morning everyone.
Relationships are the bond between two people based on mutual likes, understanding, need or love. I’d like to discuss relationships as portrayed in the two texts The Proposal and From the Diary of Anne Frank. 
In The Proposal, we see the two characters of Natalya and Lomov who are grown up individuals but lack maturity. They enter into arguments on trivial matters and overlook the solemn relationship that they are about to enter into. This reflects their england pride which does not allow them to show affection towards each other. Thus, both of them try to show the other low.
On the other hand, Anne Frank is a young girl who shows maturity through her diary entries. We get to know about the bond that she shares with her family. She has great attachment with her grandmother and did not even celebrate her birthday due to the grandmother’s illness. During the war, the family faces separation and a lot of trouble but they have the strength to support each other. 
To conclude, I’d like to say that relationships have to be maintained through understanding and affection. Mutual love and respect are the pillars of an everlasting relationship. Creating everlasting bonds is essential because a family is the biggest treasure.
Thank you
 
Also See:   

The Proposal Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Proposal Summary, Explanation 
The Proposal MCQs 
The Proposal Character Sketches 

 
First Flight Poems
Poem 1 – Dust of Snow
 
Q1. What mood of the poet is reflected in the poem ‘Dust of Snow’ initially? What images are used by the poet to bring about the effect? Comment. [40-50 words]
Ans. Initially, the poet is in a sad mood and he is regretful. The mention of the crow and the hemlock tree indicate gloom and sadness. Later, his mood becomes hopeful which shows the transformative power of nature.
 
Q2. It is our attitude towards a situation that makes it positive or negative. Do you agree with it? Express your views with reference to the poem, ‘Dust of Snow’. [40-50 words]
Ans. I agree with the statement. In the poem, we see how the symbols of sadness and despair the crow and the hemlock tree prove to be auspicious and bring a positive change in the poet’s mood. Thus, it is the poet’s attitude which considers these bad omens to be good for him.
 
Also See: 

Dust of Snow Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Dust of Snow Summary, Explanation 
Dust of Snow MCQs 
Dust of Snow Character Sketches 

 
Poem 3 – A Tiger in the Zoo
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions :
(A) He stalks in his vivid stripes
The few steps of his cage,
On pads of velvet quiet,
In his quiet rage.
 
He should be lurking in shadow,
Sliding through long grass
Near the water pole
Where plump deer pass.
 
He should be snarling around houses
At the jungle’s edge,
Baring his white fangs, his claws,
Terrorising the village!
 
(i) State any one point of contrast between the tiger in the zoo and in its natural habitat.
Ans. He is restricted in the zoo which he enjoys freedom when he is in the jungle.
 
(ii) When the speaker suggests that the tiger should be “Snarling around houses at the jungle’s edge”, What does he insinuate about the tiger’s natural behaviour and habitat?
Ans.  Naturally, the tiger is ferocious, he roars and scares the people living in villages at the edge of the jungle.
 
(iii) The poet’s skillful use of imagery effectively depicts the confinement and frustration of the tiger. Elaborate in about 40 words.
Ans. The poet describes the cell in the zoo where the tiger is locked and walks in the limited area. It does not roar, neither does it create any sound with the paws which are soft like velvet fabric.
 
(iv) Which phrase would correctly substitute ‘quiet rage’ in the given sentence from the extract?
The few steps of his cage on pads of velvet quiet in his ‘quiet rage.’
Ans. Unexpressed anger
 
(B) He stalks in his vivid stripes
The few steps of his cage,
On pads of velvet quiet,
In his quiet rage
 
(i) Explain the contrast created by the words, ‘stalks’ and ‘few steps of his cage’.
Ans. The word ‘stalks’ indicates to walk majestically which shows the natural grace and power of the tiger. In opposition, ‘the few steps of the cage’ show confinement and limitation to the tiger’s freedom. 
 
(ii) Which of the following best describes the tiger’s feelings in the context ?
(A) anger (B) conflicted
(C) pessimism (D) apprehension
Ans. (D)
 
(iii) Comment in about 40 words on the poet’s use of imagery in the above extract.
Ans. The poet uses descriptive words when he describes the bright colours of the tiger. The tiger is restricted in the small cell, he walks in the restricted area. The tiger cannot roar and show its ferociousness. It walks quietly as the soft paws with a velvety texture are similar to the quietness of the tiger.
 
(iv) Which word in the stanza means the same as ‘clear and bright’ ?
Ans. The word in the stanza that means ‘clear and bright’ is “vivid,” which describes the tiger’s stripes.
 
(C) But he’s locked in a concrete cell,
His strength behind bars,
Stalking the length of his cage,
Ignoring visitors.
(A Tiger in the Zoo)
 
(i) Why is the tiger ‘stalking the length of his cage’?
Ans. The tiger is ‘stalking the length of his cage’ likely due to a natural instinct to move and a restless spirit, which is not satisfied with the confines of the cage.
 
(ii) What is the significance of the use of the word ‘locked’ to describe the concrete cell where the tiger is kept and how does it contrast with the tiger’s presence in its natural habitat? Answer in about 40 words.
Ans. The use of the word ‘locked’ emphasizes captivity and the lack of freedom. It contrasts sharply with the tiger’s natural habitat, where it would roam freely and be the master of its own domain. In its natural habitat, the tiger would not be confined or controlled, unlike the restrictive and unnatural concrete cell.
 
(iii) Complete the sentence with the appropriate option :
The lines from the poem tell us that the tiger is ________ .
(A) enjoying his time in the cell
(B) being indifferent to visitors because it is a daily routine for him
(C) not as strong as his counterpart in the jungle
(D) wanting to be free from the cage
Ans. (D)
 
(iv) Identify the type of literary device used in the line: 
‘But he’s locked in a concrete cell’
Ans. The literary device used in the line ‘But he’s locked in a concrete cell’ is a metaphor. The phrase compares the tiger’s cell to a prison, highlighting the confinement and the unnatural state of living for a wild animal.
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. The poem, “A Tiger in the Zoo” moves from the zoo to the jungle; and back again to the zoo. What effect does the poet want to bring out with this? Elaborate. [40-50 words]
Ans. The poet in “A Tiger in the Zoo” contrasts the tiger’s natural habitat in the jungle with its captivity in a zoo. This movement underscores the confinement and loss of freedom experienced by the tiger, highlighting the contrast between its wild, predatory nature and its subdued, restricted existence in captivity. It evokes a sense of pity for the tiger and raises awareness about the impact of human intervention on wild animals.
 
Also See: 

A Tiger in the Zoo Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
A Tiger in the Zoo Summary, Explanation 
A Tiger in the Zoo MCQs 
A Tiger in the Zoo Character Sketches 

 
Poem 4 – How to Tell Wild Animals
 
Read the given extracts and answer the questions:
The true Chameleon is small
A lizard sort of thing;
He hasn’t any ears at all,
And not a single wing,
If there is nothing on the tree,
‘Tis the Chameleon you see.
(How To Tell Wild Animals)
 
(i) Fill in the blank with one word :
When the speaker says “If there is nothing on the tree, ‘Tis the Chameleon you see”, he refers to _____ as characteristic trait of a true Chameleon.
Ans. camouflage
 
(ii) What does the speaker mean when he says, “A lizard sort of thing”?
Ans. When the speaker says, “A lizard sort of thing,” he means that a Chameleon is similar in appearance to a lizard. This comparison helps to describe the Chameleon’s physical form in a simple and relatable way.
 
(iii) Which of the following best describes the speaker’s disposition while describing the Chameleon?
(A) indifferent 
(B) playful
(C) dismissive 
(D) respectful
Ans. (B)
 
(iv) Comment on the poet’s use of language in these lines. Answer in about 40 words.
Ans. The poet’s use of language in these lines is playful and light-hearted. By describing the Chameleon in simple, whimsical terms and using rhymes, the poet makes the description engaging and memorable. This approach captures the reader’s imagination while effectively conveying the Chameleon’s distinctive traits, such as its ability to camouflage.
 
Also See: 

How To Tell Wild Animals Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
How To Tell Wild Animals Summary, Explanation 
How To Tell Wild Animals MCQs 

 
Poem 5 – The Ball Poem
 
Read the given extracts and answer the questions :
(A) No use to say ‘O there are other balls
An ultimate shaking grief fixes the boy
As he stands rigid, trembling, staring down
All his young days into the harbour where his ball went.
I would not intrude on him,
A dime, another ball, is worthless. Now
He senses first responsibility
In a world of possessions. People will take
Balls, balls will be lost always, little boy
And no one buys a ball back. Money is external
He is learning….. 
 
(i) Which of the following best describes the speaker’s attitude towards the boy’s reaction to losing his ball?
(A) indifferent as the ball is inexpensive
(B) sympathetic, understanding the depth of the boy’s loss
(C) mocking, finding the boy’s reaction exaggerated and unnecessary.
(D) panicked, sharing the boy’s distress over the lost ball.
Ans. (B)
 
(ii) Comment on the use of metaphor in the above extract.
Ans. The reference to a ball is a metaphor as the poet is referring to possessions. 
 
(iii) Explain the phrase ‘all his young days into the harbour’ with reference to the extract.
Ans. As the ball rolls down into the stream, the boy is reminded of the memories of the ball. The childhood days when he played with it.
 
(iv) Briefly state in about 40 words the boy’s journey from ‘shaking grief’ to ‘he is learning’ in the above extract.
Ans. It is the first instance of experiencing loss. He is trembling and unable to move due to extreme sadness of losing the ball. Gradually, he is learning to cope up with the grief and to accept the loses.
 
(B) And no one buys a ball back, Money is external
He is learning, well behind his desperate eyes
The epistemology of loss, how to standup.
 
(i) When the poet says that “no one buys a ball back”, what does he refer to in the context of the poem?
Ans. He refers that a loss is irreversible. Once lost, we cannot retrieve the possession or person. 
 
(ii) Complete the sentence with an appropriate option :
The lines from the poem tell us that the boy is experiencing _____.
(A) distress 
(B) terror
(C) realisation 
(D) elation
Ans. (A)
 
(iii) What is the significance of the term “desperate” used to describe the boy’s eyes in the poem, and how does it contribute to the overall mood and tone of the poem?
Ans. It intensifies the mood as we see that the boy is highly emotional and the desperation in his eyes shows that he really wants the ball back. The reader becomes empathetic towards the boy’s plight.
 
(iv) Identify and discuss the poet’s use of metaphor in the poem “The Ball Poem”.
Ans. The ball is a metaphor for all kinds of possessions. The poet conveys a deep meaning by applying the logic towards all types of losses in life. The young boy is deeply shocked on experiencing a minor loss as it is the first time but gradually, he will learn to cope up with loss.
 
(C) In a world of possessions. People will take
Balls, balls will be lost always, little boy.
And no one buys a ball back. Money is external.
He is learning, well behind his desperate eyes,
The epistemology of loss, how to stand up
Knowing what every man must one day know
And most know many days, how to stand up.
(The Ball Poem)
 
(i) Fill in the blank with one word.
When the speaker says “People will take balls, Balls will be lost always, little boy”, his tone is __________.
Ans. philosophical
 
(ii) The poet says that money is external. What inference can be drawn from this statement? Answer in about 40 words.
Ans. The statement “money is external” suggests that money is a material possession that exists outside of the emotional and personal realm. It implies that while money can buy things, it cannot replace sentimental or personal losses.
 
(iii) Which of the following best describes the speaker’s attitude towards material possessions? 
(A) indifferent
(B) emotional
(C) casual
(D) respectful
Ans. (A)
 
(iv) Identify the poetic device used in “And no one buys a ball back”.
Ans. Alliteration
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. ‘The Ball Poem’ initially appears simple but it is actually quite impactful and intense. Comment upon the theme of ‘The Ball Poem’. [40-50 words]
Ans. “The Ball Poem’ delves into themes of loss, maturation, and the harsh reality of impermanence. Through the lens of a boy losing his ball, it reflects on the poignant moment of coming to terms with loss and the inevitable process of growing up, teaching a profound lesson on the acceptance of life’s transient nature and the inevitability of letting go.
 
Q2. You have been chosen to address the school assembly, to speak on the epistemology of loss and the resilience of the human spirit during times of crisis. Prepare the speech draft, with reference to the commonality of themes in ‘The Ball Poem’ by John Berryman and ‘From the Diary of Anne Frank’.
You may begin this way :
Good morning everyone.
Today, I’d like to discuss two pieces of literature that offer a powerful insight into how to deal with loss and the resilience of the human spirit required during times of crisis.
You may end this way :
To conclude, I’d like to say that ………….. . Thank you. [100-120 words]
Ans. Good morning everyone.
Today, I’d like to discuss two pieces of literature that offer a powerful insight into how to deal with loss and the resilience of the human spirit required during times of crisis. In the poem titled the Ball Poem by John Berryman and the prose titled From the Diary of Anne Frank, the main character learns to cope up with loss and tells us about resilience when she and her family faced trouble. 
In The Ball poem the child loses his ball and the poet tells the boy that he has to learn how to handle loss and move ahead in life. He adds that gradually, the boy will cope up with the fact that his ball is lost forever and shall learn to bear losses.
Anne Frank’s diary talks of the various times when she displayed courage and faced challenges with resilience.  
To conclude, I’d like to say that both pieces remind us that while loss is inevitable, our ability to endure and grow from it defines our resilience as individuals.
Thank You
 
Q3. You have been chosen to address the student gathering from the nearby schools, to speak on “How to Deal with Loss — Personal or Material”. Prepare the speech draft in not more than 120 words, with reference to the commonality of themes in John Benyman’s.
‘The Ball Poem’ and ‘A Sermon at Benaras’.
You may begin this way.
Good Morning everyone. Today, I’d like to discuss two pieces of literature that offer a powerful insight into how we can learn to deal with loss.
You may end in this way —
To conclude, I’d like to say that —
Thank you. [120 words]
Ans. Good morning everyone.
Today, I’d like to discuss two pieces of literature that offer a powerful insight into how we can learn to deal with loss. John Berryman’s poems, “The Ball Poem” and “A Sermon at Benares,” both explore themes of loss, whether it’s the loss of innocence, loved ones, or material things.
The young boy loses his ball and watches as it bounces and lands into the stream. He stands frozen because he cannot accept the separation from his possession. The poet comments that slowly, the boy will learn to accept loses and would cope up with the grief.
Kisa Gotami cannot bear the death of her son. When she fails to find a house that has not suffered the pain of losing a beloved to death, she realizes that she had been selfish in her love. Thus, she accepts the temporal nature of human life. She accepts the loss of her son and comes out of the sadness.
To conclude, I’d like to say that embracing these lessons can help us navigate our own losses with courage and wisdom.
Thank you.
 
Also See: 

The Ball Poem Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Ball Poem Summary, Explanation 
The Ball Poem MCQs 
The Ball Poem Character Sketches 

 
Poem 6 – Amanda
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions :
Don’t eat that chocolate, Amanda!
Remember your acne, Amanda!
Will you please look at me when I’m speaking to you, 
Amanda!
(I am Rapunzel, I have not a care;
life in a tower is tranquil and rare;)
(Amanda)
 
(i) What is the central idea of the poem as reflected in the lines above?
Answer in about 40 words.
Ans. The central idea of the poem is that Amanda feels stifled or restricted by the instructions and persistent scoldings, preferring instead to escape into a fantasy world where she imagines herself as Rapunzel, free from cares and responsibilities.
 
(ii) Complete the sentence with the appropriate option.
“Will you please look at me when I’m speaking to you, Amanda!” tells us that the mother’s attitude is ______.
(A) loving 
(B) relaxed
(C) authoritative 
(D) thoughtful
Ans. (C)
 
(iii) Identify any one poetic device used in the above extract.
Ans. The poetic device used in the above extract is repetition, specifically the repetition of Amanda’s name at the end of each line, emphasizing the mother’s insistence and Amanda’s contemplation.
 
(iv) For what reason does Amanda imagine herself to be Rapunzel?
Ans. Amanda imagines herself to be Rapunzel because Rapunzel lives a life of tranquility and rarity in a tower, which contrasts sharply with Amanda’s current situation of being constantly instructed or scolded (“Don’t eat that chocolate,” “Remember your acne,” etc.). Being Rapunzel allows Amanda to escape into a world where she can be carefree and away from the pressures and admonishments of everyday life.
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. Explain why Amanda wants to be an orphan. Refer to the given lines, from the text — I am an orphan, roaming the street. I pattern soft dust with my hushed, bare feet. The silence is golden, the freedom is sweet. [40-50 words]
Ans. Amanda is fed up with her mother’s constant scolding and nagging. She prefers being an orphan rather than to have such a parent. She feels that her mother does not understand her feelings. Thus, Amanda wants to be an orphan.
 
Q2. In every alternate stanza, Amanda drifts into fantasy and yearns for more freedom and silence. Justify and elaborate the reason. [40-50 words]
Ans. Amanda fantasizes being a mermaid, Rapunzel and an orphan because these thoughts offer refuge from her reality. She seeks an escape from her mother’s nagging and scolding. The contrast between her real-life constraints and the tranquility of her fantasies underscores her desire for autonomy and a break from being monitored and judged.
 
Q3. In the poem ‘Amanda’, why does the poet use the famous fairy tale character, Rapunzel? Explain. [40-50 words]
Ans. Rapunzel is a symbol of freedom and escape. She lives alone in a huge castle. She lives a peaceful life which Amanda desires for.
 
Q4. In one instance, Amanda considers herself to be an orphan. What connotation does it entail? [40-50 words]
Ans. Amanda’s vision of being an orphan shows her desperation. She cannot bear the constant nagging of her mother and so, she thinks that it is better not to have parents than to have such ruthless, heartless ones.
 
Q5. Amanda from the poem ‘Amanda’ is a teenager like Anne Frank and lives in her fantasy world whereas Anne is a chatter box. What conversation will Anne Frank have with Amanda about different perspectives of life? Write your answer in about 120 words. [120 words]
Ans. As Anne is talkative in nature, she will start a conversation with Amanda. When Anne will come to know that Amanda is disturbed due to her mother’s constant nagging, Anne will understand her situation. Anne is a wise and mature girl. She will try to convince Amanda that her mother is scolding her for Amanda’s benefit. Anne will also advice her to think positively because parents think the best for their child. Anne will be sympathetic towards Amanda and she can also suggest that whenever Amanda’s mom scolds her, Amanda can try to justify her act just like Anne did with her Maths teacher. To conclude, Anne will sum up that Amanda should think positively and if she is justified for her acts, then she should come up with intelligent arguments to support her claim and try to convince her mother.
 
Also See: 

Amanda Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Amanda Summary, Explanation 
Amanda MCQs
Amanda Character Sketches 

 
Poem 7 – The Trees
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions :
My head is full of whispers
Which tomorrow will be silent.
Listen. The glass is breaking.
The trees are stumbling forward
into the night. Winds rush to meet them.
The moon is broken like a mirror,
its pieces flash now in the crown
of the tallest Oak.
(The Trees)
 
(i) Identify the figure of speech used in the line : “The Trees are stumbling forward into the night”.
Ans. The figure of speech used in the line “The trees are stumbling forward into the night” is personification. Trees are given human characteristics of “stumbling” and moving “forward into the night.”
 
(ii) Explain the significance of the line:
“The moon is broken like a mirror, its pieces flash now in the crown of the tallest Oak.” Answer in about 40 words.
Ans. The significance of the line “The moon is broken like a mirror, its pieces flash now in the crown of the tallest Oak” lies in its vivid imagery and metaphor. The reader can visualize the moon which is shining and it is interrupted by the branches of the tree which make the moon appear to be broken into pieces. The poet has visualized nature in an unusual manner.
 
(iii) Complete the sentence with the appropriate option. In the third line, the word ‘Listen’ is used to _________.
(A) serve no purpose but to complete the sentence.
(B) emphasize listening carefully to the sound of glass breaking.
(C) emphasize listening carefully as a change is about to take place.
(D) make the reader more attentive.
Ans. (C)
 
(iv) What does the line: “My head is full of whispers which tomorrow will be silent” tell us about the poet’s state of mind?
Ans. It indicates that the thoughts in the poet’s mind are temporary. She knows that life is not always the same and the botherations of today will fade off with time.
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. “The trees” is a symbolic poem and Adrienne Rich has used trees as a metaphor for human beings. What do they symbolize? Explain. [40-50 words]
Ans. The trees symbolize women who want freedom. They want to escape from the confinement of their homes and become free in the vast open forest. They are trying to release the roots from the ground so that they can go out and meet the air which is a symbol of freedom.
 
Also See: 

The Trees Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Trees Summary, Explanation 
The Trees MCQs 

 
Poem 9 – The Tale of Custard the Dragon
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions :
Belinda was as brave as a barrel full of bears,
And Ink and Blink chased lions down the stairs,
Mustard was as brave as a tiger in a rage,
But Custard cried for a nice safe cage.
(The Tale of Custard the Dragon)
 
(i) Comment upon the contrast that is reflected in the last two lines of the extract.
Ans. The contrast in the last two lines reflects the disparity between the purported bravery of Mustard, likened to a tiger in a rage, and the reality of Custard’s fear, expressing a wish for the safety of a cage. Despite Mustard’s aggressive comparison, it is Custard’s honest expression of fear that stands out.
 
(ii) Fill in the blank with one word.
While describing Ink and Blink, the speaker says that they could chase lions down the stairs. By saying so, he is revealing the ________ characteristic of their personality.
Ans. imaginary
 
(iii) Comment on the poet’s use of language in these lines in about 40 words.
Ans. The poet’s use of language is playful and he exagerates things to make it humorous. He creates a musical effect by employing rhyme.
 
(iv) Which of the following best describes the theme of the poem?
(A) Bravery and heroism
(B) Humility leads to bravery
(C) Valour and diligence
(D) Crisis reveals character
Ans. (A)
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. What makes Custard, the dragon look fearsome? Explain. [40-50 words]
Ans. Custard has big sharp teeth, spikes on top and scales beneath, the mouth emits fire and the nose gives out smoke. The claws are like knives. All this gives Custard a fearful appearance.
 
Q2. Bring out the central idea of the poem. ‘The Tale of Custard the Dragon’. [40-50 words]
Ans. The central idea of the poem is the contrast between bravery and cowardice. While Belinda and the other pets who bullied Custard turned out to be cowards when they were put in danger; it was the intimidated Custard who showed courage and gulped the pirate. 
 
Q3. Orden Nash’s ‘The Tale of Custard The Dragon’ is a humorous ballad – a song on a poem that tells a story. Justify. [40-50 words]
Ans. The poem is lyrical and the use of rhyming words makes lends it a musical effect. The poem is a ballad which tells the story of Belinda and her pets. There is humour and suspense. The poem has many twists and turns which make it enjoyable and memorable.
 
Q4. Ogden Nash uses vivid imagery in ‘The Tale of Custard the Dragon’ to appeal to the senses. Elaborate the imagery used for the Pirate. [40-50 words]
Ans. In “The Tale of Custard the Dragon,” Ogden Nash vividly describes the pirate as having a black beard, a wooden leg, and holding pistols and a bright cutlass in his teeth. Nash’s vivid descriptions create a clear mental picture of the menacing pirate climbing through Belinda’s window, adding suspense and humor to the poem.
 
Q5. Belinda and other animals have been described as brave. But on seeing the pirate they behaved in a cowardly way. How did they react? [40-50 words]
Ans. Belinda turned pale with fear. She cried for help. Mustard ran barking fearfully. Ink went to the bottom of the house and hid in a hole. 
 
Q6. ‘The Tale of Custard the Dragon’ is a humorous ballad. How does Ogden Nash create humour and entertainment in the poem? [40-50 words]
Ans. The poem is funny and entertaining. There is use of vivid description, rhyming names of the pets, light-hearted tone and imagination. The light hearted story becomes serious when a pirate enters the scene and then the truth of bravery versus cowardice is brought to light.
 
Also See: 

The Tale of Custard the Dragon Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Tale of Custard the Dragon Summary, Explanation 
The Tale of Custard the Dragon MCQs 
The Tale of Custard the Dragon Character Sketches 

 
Poem 10 – For Anne Gregory
 
Q1. Explain, why the speaker mentions God in the poem “For Anne Gregory”. [40-50 words]
Ans. God is mentioned in the poem because God is the only one who treats us like his child and who loves us unconditionally.
 
Q2. Do you think you can love a person for his/her inner beauty alone and not care about the physical appearance?
Justify with reference to the theme of the poem ‘For Anne Gregory’. [40-50 words]
Ans. The poem’s theme is of true love that goes beyond the physical appearance. However, one cannot overlook the fact that looks matter and it is the first impression which matters the most. One can go beyond the looks and consider the qualities of the other person only after a few interactions. The poem is right that only God loves us unconditionally because God does not expect anything from us. However, humans are not God and so, we must not expect the same from them.
 
Also See: 

For Anne Gregory Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
For Anne Gregory Summary, Explanation 
For Anne Gregory MCQs 
For Anne Gregory Character Sketches 

 
Footprints Without Feet Book

Chapter 1 – A Triumph of Surgery
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions :
The expected call came within a few days. Mrs. Pumphrey was distraught. Tricki would eat nothing. Refused even his favourite dishes; and besides he had bouts of vomiting. He spent all his time lying on a rug, panting. Didn’t want to go for walks, didn’t want to do anything.
I had made my plans in advance. The only way was to get Tricki out of the house for a period. I suggested that he be hospitalised for about a fortnight to be kept under observation. (A Triumph of Surgery)
 
(i) Which of the following is not a reason why Mr. Herriot thinks Tricki needs to be taken out of the house for a period ?
(A) He wanted to keep Tricki away from Mrs. Pumphrey.
(B) He wanted to keep Tricki under observation.
(C) He wanted to do an experiment on Tricki.
(D) He wanted to improve Tricki’s health.
Ans. (C)
 
(ii) What was the main reason for Mrs. Pumphrey to be distraught ? Answer in about 40 words.
Ans. Mrs. Pumphrey was distraught because Tricki, her beloved pet, was refusing to eat, vomiting frequently, and showing signs of illness, which deeply concerned her about his health and well-being.
 
(iii) State True or False :
When Mr. Herriot says, “I had made my plans in advance” — what he actually means is, he had already seen this trauma coming for Tricki.
Ans. True 
 
(iv) Which of the following best describes Mrs. Pumphrey ?
(A) unkind and inconsiderate
(B) impractical but compassionate
(C) anxious and ambitious
(D) fearful but confident
Ans. (B)
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. What does Mr. Herriot mean by “happy period” for himself and his partners? Explain. [40-50 words]
Ans. The happy period was the time when the surgery was flooded with delicacies sent by Mrs Pumphrey. She sent in a lot of items like eggs, wine and brandy for Tricki. However, the doctor did not feed the entire stuff to Tricki. Instead, the entire surgery had lavish feasts and enjoyed.
 
Q2. “We are often over-indulgent towards people we care about.” Explain with reference to the context of the story “A Triumph of Surgery”. [40-50 words]
Ans. In the story we see the mistress Mrs Pumphrey shows a lot of affection towards her pet. Her excessive pampering leads to an overweight and lethargic Tricki. This shows how our affection can cloud our rationality and lead to our own destruction. One has to balance love and wisdom to ensure a healthy pet.
 
Also See: 

A Triumph of Surgery Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
A Triumph of Surgery Summary, Explanation 
A Triumph of Surgery MCQs 
A Triumph of Surgery Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 2 – The Thief’s Story 
 
Read the given extracts and answer the questions :
I went back to the bazaar and sat down in the shelter of the clock tower. The clock showed midnight. I felt for the notes. They were damp from the rain.
Anil’s Money. In the morning he would probably have given me two or three rupees to go to the cinema, but now I had it all.
I couldn’t cook his meals, run to the bazaar, or learn to write whole sentences any more.
I had forgotten about them in the excitement of the theft. Whole sentences, I knew, could one day bring me more than a few hundred rupees. It was a simple matter to steal- and sometimes just as simple to be caught. (The Thief’s Story)
 
(i) Which of the following is NOT a reason why Hari Singh thinks he would not be able to write whole sentences ?
(A) Anil would not be there to teach him.
(B) He had robbed Anil and left.
(C) He would not go back to Anil to learn.
(D) He had no money to take admission in school.
Ans. (D)
 
(ii) Why is it fair to say that Hari Singh’s tone, when he says “I couldn’t cook his meals, run to the bazaar or learn to write whole sentences any more,” is filled with remorse and regret? Answer in about 40 words.
Ans. Hari realizes that the theft that he has done has led to severe loss in his routine. He feels that the gain is insignificant in comparison to the loss that the has suffered and so, he is regretful.
 
(ii) What do you infer about Hari Singh from this statement?
“Whole sentences, I knew, could one day bring me more than a few hundred rupees.”
Ans. Hari Singh realizes that getting education will enable him to earn more money and he finds the petty thefts that he does to be insignificant. He is ambitious and wants to earn his money the right may.
 
(iv) State True or False with reference to the given extract.
The reason Hari Singh was filled with a feeling of guilt was because Anil trusted him.
Ans. True 
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. Hari Singh says – “He knew it but neither his lips nor his eyes showed anything.”
Anil successfully addressed the situation by not addressing it at all. Elaborate based on your reading of The Thief’s Story. [100-120 words]
Ans. When Anil handed the wet currency to Hari Singh, it showed that he was aware that Hari had attempted theft. Anil chose not to confront Hari and he said a lot without speaking a single word. By doing this Anil showed trust in Hari and this made Hari responsible. Hari felt the need to prove his worthiness to such a trusting man. Hari did not want to leave Anil because Anil’s company promised a better future in terms of gaining education and a friend. Anil also believed that there could be the possibility that Hari Singh would change his mood and passion.
 
Q2. Imagine that Hari Singh from ‘The Thief’s Story’ by Ruskin Bond, writes a diary entry, exploring the theme of human values and relations that are essential in life and can transform a person in the context of his own experience. Write this diary entry as Hari Singh. [100-120 words]
Ans. Dear Diary,
Today has been a day of reckoning for me. I’ve always lived by taking what I needed, often without considering the consequences. But today, I faced a dilemma that made me question everything. Anil, the man I tried to steal from, showed me kindness and trust instead of anger or betrayal. His simple gestures of teaching me to cook and write left a deep impact on me.
I realized that human values like trust, kindness, and forgiveness are not weaknesses, but strengths that can transform a person. Anil’s faith in me, despite my deceit, made me reflect on my own actions and the emptiness of my previous life. I returned the money I stole, not out of fear, but out of a newfound respect.
Today taught me that relationships built on honesty and mutual respect are the true wealth in life. I want to learn from Anil, to become a better person, and perhaps, to find redemption.
Yours sincerely,
Hari Singh
 
Also See: 

The Thief’s Story Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Thief’s Story Summary, Explanation 
The Thief’s Story MCQs 
The Thief’s Story Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 3 – The Midnight Visitor 
 
Q1. Who was Henry? What role did he play in Ausable’s plan? [40-50 words]
Ans. Henry was a server at the French hotel where Ausable had a room. He played a vital part in helping Ausable’s plan as it was Henry’s knock at the door which frightened Max as he mistook it to be a policeman at the door. This confusion forced Max to jump from the window assuming it to be a deck and hence helping Ausable’s plan to get relief from Max. 
 
Q2. Despite his unusual appearance, Ausable’s presence of mind helped him get rid of Max.
Comment with reference to the story ‘The Midnight Visitor’. [40-50 words]
OR
One should never judge a book by its cover. Explain with reference to Ausable and how he outwits Max with his presence of mind. [40-50 words]
Ans. Ausable’s appearance was just not that of a secret detective. The maxim ‘Looks are deceptive’ describes him best. As they say do not judge a book by its cover, Max was foolish to underestimate Ausable. He jumped out of the window when he got convinced by Ausable’s story that there was police at the door and there was a balcony outside the window.
 
Also See: 

The Midnight Visitor Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Midnight Visitor Summary, Explanation 
The Midnight Visitor MCQs 
The Midnight Visitor Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 4 – A Question of Trust
 
Q1. Horace Danby was a typical thief. Describe how he planned his work. [40-50 words]
Ans. Horace was a meticulous plannner. He had been studying the house at Shotover Grange for two weeks. He had studied the plan of the house, the electric wiring system, the paths and the garden. He had seen the housekeeper hang the keys of the kitchen door on a hook outside. When the family left for London and the two servants were off to the movies, he found the perfect time for the theft.
 
Q2. “Horace Danby is a thief who was cheated by another thief.” Justify. [40-50 words]
Ans. Horace was skilled and carried out the thefts systematically. During the theft at Shotover Grange, he met a woman who appeared to be the lady of the house. She negotiated with him to let him free if he helped her retrieve the code of the safe. Horace trusted her and helped her. However, she was a thief, she stole the jewels and Horace got caught because his finger prints were all over the place.
 
Q3. How did the lady in red manage to outsmart and out maneuver the other thief, Horace Danby, by robbing the safe without leaving a single fingerprint? [100-120 words]
Ans. The lady in red was also a thief like Horace Danby. But it was the lady in the red dress who outmanoeuvred and outwitted Horace. No doubt, Horace did his job quite professionally. He worked hard to find out the necessary details about the location of the house and the position of the key and the safe.
But, Horace proved to be a novice in judging the young lady. The young lady acted with so much confidence and in such a convincing manner that she could easily pass off as the lady of the house. Horace Danby became a mere puppet who danced to the tune of the lady.
When caught red-handed, he pleaded her to let him go. The young lady exploited his confusion and fear of going to prison fully. She made Horace open the safe. The unsuspecting Horace was made to believe that he was working for the lady of the house. So he opened the safe without putting on his gloves.
He gave the jewels to the lady leaving his fingerprints on the safe. So he was found out and arrested. Naturally, the young lady in red proved far smarter and outmanoeuvred Horace Danby.
 
Also See: 

A Question of Trust Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
A Question of Trust Summary, Explanation 
A Question of Trust MCQs 
A Question of Trust Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 5 – Footprints without Feet
 
Read the following extracts and answer the questions:
The arrival of a stranger at an inn in winter was in any case an unusual event. A stranger of such uncommon appearance set all tongues wagging. Mrs. Hall, the landlord’s wife, made every effort to be friendly. But Griffin had no desire to talk, and told her, “My reason for coming to Iping is a desire for solitude. I do not wish to be disturbed in my work. Besides, an accident has affected my face.” Satisfied that her guest was an eccentric scientist, and in view of the fact that he had paid her in advance, Mrs. Hall was prepared to excuse his strange habits and irritable temper. (Footprints Without Feet)
 
(i) State any one inference about Griffin from the given context:
“My reason for coming to Iping is a desire for solitude. I do not wish to be disturbed in my work. Besides, an accident has affected my face.”
Ans. Griffin is a private person who loves solitude. He wants to go away from the noisy city. He experienced an accident which disfigured his face.
 
(ii) State True or False:
Even though Mrs. Hall was satisfied with Griffin, she was skeptical to excuse his strange habits and irritable temper.
Ans. False
 
(iii) It was not difficult for Griffin to convince the landlord and his wife about his strange appearance and eccentric behaviour.
Elaborate in about 40 words with reference to the context.
Ans. Griffin made the payments promptly which played a significant role in convincing the landlady. His strange behaviour and appearance was justified by his profession of being a scientist who had been affected by an accident.
 
(iv) Which phrase would correctly substitute ‘set all tongues wagging’ in the given sentence from the extract?
A stranger of such uncommon appearance ____________.
Ans. sparked everyone’s curiosity.
 
Question Answers
 
Q1. Scientists contribute to make the world a better place. Griffin is an antithesis to this statement. Justify. [40-50 words]
Ans. Griffin is a violent man who resorts to destruction. He uses his scientific research to rob his landlord. Once he is caught sleeping in a store in London, he attacks the storekeeper. At the in at Iping, he attacks the owners by becoming invisible. Thus, he misuse the scientific advancements. 
 
Q2. A character arc is the transformation or development of a character throughout a story and refers to the changes a character undergoes as a result of his/her experiences, challenges and interactions with other characters.
In light of the above information, trace the character arc of Griffin in H.G. Wells’ Footprints without Feet’. [100-120 words]
Ans. Griffin is a mad scientist who uses his scientific advancement for the wrong reasons. He becomes invisible and then sets the landlord’s house on fire. He escapes and only the muddy footprints are visible. Then he enters a closed store, looking for warmth, sleeps through the night and on being discovered, hits the storekeeper. Then he again steals things like props from a theatre store. Griffin is an anti-social and anti-law. He wants to escape the city and his search for solitude takes him to the village of Iping. There also, his irritant nature leads him to hit people and enter into fights. Finally, the policeman Jaffers is called in to catch the invisible man who creates a lot of ruckus.
 
Q3. Imagine that Griffin’s conscience pricks him and he decides to write a diary entry, about misusing science and endangering society, in the context of his own experience.
Write this diary entry, as Griffin, in about 120 words.
(Reference — Footprints without Feet by H.G. Wells) [120 words]
Ans. Dear Diary
Today, my conscience pricked me. I’ve used my scientific discoveries not for the betterment of humanity, but for selfish and harmful purposes. My invisibility formula, a brilliant achievement, led me down a dark path. I set fire to my landlord’s house, stole money, and terrified innocent people. I see now that my actions have endangered society and caused fear and chaos. Instead of using my discovery to help others, I became a criminal. Science should be used to improve lives, not destroy them. I regret my choices deeply. I hope that someday, my story will serve as a warning about the dangers of misusing scientific knowledge for personal gain.
Bye
 
Q4. Griffin’s brilliance as a man of science fades before his darker traits. Give reasons from the text to support your answer. [100-120 words]
Ans. Griffin’s brilliance as a scientist is overshadowed by his darker traits throughout the story. Despite his intellect and scientific achievements in making himself invisible, he uses this power for selfish and destructive purposes. He sets fire to his landlord’s house out of revenge and steals money to sustain himself. His actions show a disregard for others’ well-being and a willingness to manipulate and harm. Instead of using his brilliance to benefit society, he chooses a path of lawlessness and deceit. Griffin’s descent into criminality highlights how his scientific brilliance becomes tainted by his lack of empathy and moral compass, ultimately diminishing his legacy as a man of science.
 
Also See:  

Footprints Without Feet Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Footprints Without Feet Summary, Explanation 
Footprints Without Feet MCQs 
Footprints Without Feet Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 6 – The Making of a Scientist
 
Q1. Justify how Ebright’s mother played an important part in his becoming a scientist. [40-50 words]
OR
“Richie was my whole life after his father died.,” said Richard’s mother. Describe Richard Ebright’s relationship with his mother. [40-50 words]
Ans. Ebright’s mother played a key role in his journey to becoming a scientist. She was his companion. She encouraged his curiosity, provided him with tools and resources like microscopes and books, and spent evenings working on learning activities with him. Her constant support and involvement nurtured his interest in science and motivated him to pursue it passionately.
 
Q2. How can one say that Ebright’s curiosity / inquisitiveness drove him to become a scientist? [40-50 words]
Ans. Ebright’s curiosity led him to explore and experiment from a young age. He collected butterflies, conducted experiments, and constantly sought answers to scientific questions. His desire to understand how things work drove him to perform research and make discoveries, ultimately leading him to a successful career as a scientist.
 
Q3. What is common about the role that Dr. Urquhart and Mr. Weiherer played in Richard Ebright’s life? Describe any one commonality with evidence from the text. “The Making of a Scientist”. [40-50 words]
Ans. Richard Ebright was mentored by both Dr. Urquhart and Mr. Weiherer. Dr. Urquhart’s influence saw Ebright’s interest in butterflies while Mr. Weiherer enabled him to get access to lab equipment and materials concomitant with his scientific interests. Both mentors influenced Ebright’s pathway to becoming a scientist in the future direction of Richard Ebright as a scholar.
 
Also See:   

The Making of a Scientist Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Making of a Scientist Summary, Explanation 
The Making of a Scientist MCQs 
The Making of a Scientist Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 7 – The Necklace
 
Q1. Why was Madam Loisel shocked at the end of the story? [40-50 words]
OR
What is the twist at the end of the story ‘The Necklace’? [40-50 words]
Ans. The Loisel’s went in debt, gave away everything they had, bore several hardships to return the lost necklace. Later, when Madame Loisel gets to know that her friend’s lost necklace was an imitation, she is in for a surprise. The lost necklace was not worth more than 500 Francs for which they took a loan of 36,000 Francs.
 
Q2. A character arc is the transformation or development of a character throughout a story and refers to the changes a character undergoes as a result of their experiences, challenges, and interactions with other characters.
In the light of the above information, trace the character arc of Matilda in Guy De Maupassants’ ‘The Necklace’, in about 120 words. [120 words]
Ans. In Guy De Maupassant’s ‘ The Necklace,’ Matilda undergoes a profound character arc. Initially, she is discontented with her modest life and dreams of luxury and status. This longing drives her to borrow a diamond necklace from a friend for a party, where she revels in the attention and admiration of others. However, the loss of  the necklace plunges her into a desperate struggle to replace it, leading to years of hardship and poverty for her and her husband. Through these trials, Matilda experiences a transformation from a vain and discontented woman to one who understands the true value of things and the consequences of her choices. The story’s conclusion, where it is revealed  the necklace was fake, underscores the irony of her transformation. Thus, Matilda’s character arc illustrates the themes of deception, vanity, and the harsh realities of social ambition.
 
Also See:   

The Necklace Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Necklace Summary, Explanation 
The Necklace MCQs 
The Necklace Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 8 – Bholi
 
Q1. Why did Bholi’s teacher feel like an artist admiring her masterpiece? [40-50 words]
Ans. When Bholi refused marrying a man her father’s age who sought dowry, the teacher was elated. The cowed Bholi stood up for herself and became the confident Sulekha. This transformation was due to the teacher who looked at her with admiration.
 
Q2. Do you think Bholi could have confidently refused to marry Bishamber if she wasn’t educated? Give reasons. [40-50 words]
Ans. No. Bholi got the courage and confidence to speak for herself only through education. Now she would work as a teacher which would give her financial freedom as well. This empowerment is essential and it gave Bholi the capability to refuse marrying Bishamber. Now she knew that she did not need him to support her as she could stand on her feet.
 
Q3. A character arc is the transformation or development of a character throughout a story and refers to the changes a character undergoes as a result of his/her experiences, challenges and interactions with other characters.
In the light of the above information, trace the character arc of Bholi in K.A. Abbas’s ‘Bholi’. [100-120 words]
Ans. Bholi’s character develops from a simpleton who stammers, is unkept and not taken care of into a confident, independent woman. 
Initially, we see that Bholi is an unwanted girl child who is disliked by her mother. They family considers the fourth daughter as a burden. She is not bathed, her hair is messy and she wears old clothes of the elder siblings. 
Bholi’s life changes when her father attends the inauguration of a school in the village and he is directed to send his daughter to school. The first day of school marks the turning point in Bholi’s life. Bholi is bathed, her hair is oiled and combed which makes her feel special. Then when her father takes her out of the house she is reluctant because she feels that just like the family sold their cow and it was sent away, perhaps Bholi too was being sent away. 
At school, Bholi’s initial reluctance and stammering were laughed at but her teacher made her feel comfortable. The affection of the teacher gave confidence and gradually, Bholi turns out to be a well-educated, confident woman. Her name, Sulekha suits her personality. Bholi can take her decisions and refuses to marry a greedy old man. She vouches to live with her parents and serve them.
Her story is a testament to the power of resilience and the importance of finding one’s voice.
 
Q4. Imagine that Bholi writes a diary entry, exploring the themes of ‘Girl Child’ and ‘Impact of Education’, in the context of her own experiences.
Write this dairy entry, as Bholi. [100-120 words]
Ans. Dear  Diary,
Today has been a day of great change for me. I never thought I could speak up like I did. It feels like a miracle. All these years, I was a simpleton who stammered but finally, I was able to find my voice.
Education has changed everything, thanks to my teacher. It taught me to see myself differently, not just as the girl with pockmarks and a stammer, but as someone with potential. My teacher believed in me when no one else did. She showed me kindness and patience. She made me realize that being educated means more than just reading and writing—it means finding my strength and speaking up for myself.
Being a girl child in our village isn’t easy. It was the opportunity of going to school that changed my life. It gave me courage to refuse a marriage that was based on greed and not on love or respect. It empowered me to make my own choices.
Today, I am proud of who I am, and I owe it all to the power of education.
Bye diary
 
Also See: 

Bholi Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
Bholi Summary, Explanation 
Bholi MCQs 
Bholi Character Sketches 

 
Chapter 9 – The Book that Saved the Earth
 
Q1. A well known book of nursery rhymes saved the world from a Martian invasion. Comment with reference to ‘The Book that Saved the Earth’. [40-50 words]
Ans. In “The Book that Saved the Earth,” a book of nursery rhymes prevented Martians from invading Earth. The Martians misunderstood the book’s rhymes as Earth’s military secrets. This misunderstanding led them to fear Earth’s capabilities, causing them to abandon their invasion plans. So, a simple book saved the world by preventing interplanetary conflict.
 
Q2. How did Think – Tank interpret the following nursery rhyme? 
“How does your garden grow with cockle shells and silver bells?” [40-50 words]
Ans. Think-Tank interprets the given words to mean that the earthlings grew shells and silver in their gardens. This caused him to withhold their planned invasion of Earth as he felt that Earth was more advanced than Mars.
 
Q3. How did Apprentice Noodle act smartly by suggesting something about the book without offending Think-Tank? [40-50 words]
Ans. He acts smartly by suggesting that the book, initially misunderstood as a “sandwich” by Think-Tank, might be a communication device-specifically, a “corn communicator” due to its resemblance to corn, which they speculate could be Earth’s primary form of communication. This suggestion cleverly shifts Think-Tank’s perception of the book without directly contradicting or offending him, preserving his ego. 
 
Also See: 

The Book That Saved The Earth Important Questions, NCERT Solutions, Extra Questions 
The Book That Saved The Earth Summary, Explanation 
The Book That Saved The Earth MCQs 
The Book That Saved The Earth Character Sketches 

 
					
					
					on


		   
		  
		  	   
					
		Submit a Comment Cancel replyYour email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment * Name * 
Email * 
Website 
 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.
		
		 

Δ
	
							
				

						

				
					

					




		English Grammar			All English Grammar Topics, Exercises, examples, MCQ Tests
English Grammar Examples
Active and Passive Voice Definition, Rules, Exercise, and Example Sentences
Countable and Uncountable Nouns Meaning, Definition, Difference and Examples
Direct and Indirect Speech, Format, Rules, Exercise, and Examples
Determiners Definition, Types, Exercise and Examples
All About Tenses | Tenses Examples, Types of Tenses in English Grammar
English Vocabulary for Bank PO Exams – Synonyms MCQ Videos
Noun Definition, Types, Exercise with Examples in Hindi and English
What is a Verb? Definition, Types of Verbs, Exercise and Verbs Examples in Hindi and English
What is a Preposition? Definition, Types, Exercise, and Examples in Hindi and English
Subject Verb Agreement Rules and Examples
Modals Definition | Modals Exercise, List of Modals with Examples
Master Tenses in English Grammar – The Easy Way

		English Writing Skills			English Grammar Examples
All English Grammar Topics, Exercises, examples, MCQ Tests
Analytical Paragraph Writing | Format, Examples, Samples
Report Writing Format | How to Report Writing Examples, Topics, Samples and Types
Letter to Editor Class 10 to 12, Topics, Sample and Example
Informal Letter Format, Topics, Examples
Article Writing Format, Topics and Examples
Classified advertisement writing examples
Letter to the Principal, Format, Samples
Story Writing , Format, Topics, Examples
Job Application with Biodata, Format, Topics, Examples
Leave Application Format for Office, School and Sample
Leave Application for Marriage, Format, Sample, and Examples
Speech Writing format, examples for Class 11, 12
Invitation writing tips for class 12
Report writing tips for class 12
10 Important Things to DO to score more in Debate writing question
Let us revise Reported Speech in 9 Quick Steps
Job Application Writing Tips for Class 12 English
Tips to ace the question on Analytical Paragraph writing in Class 10

		Class 10 School Lessons			CBSE Class 10 Important Questions
CBSE Class 10 English Lesson Explanation
CBSE Class 10 English MCQs
CBSE Class 10 English Important Questions
Class 10 English First Flight word meaning
Class 10 English First Flight Poems word meaning
Class 10 English Footprints without Feet word meanings
CBSE Class 10 English Chapter-wise Video Explanations
CBSE Class 10 English MCQs Videos
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 10 
CBSE Class 10 English Important Questions Videos
CBSE Class 10 Science Lessons Explanation
CBSE Class 10 Science Chapter-wise Video Explanation
CBSE Class 10 Science MCQs
CBSE Class 10 Science MCQs Videos
CBSE Class 10 Science Important Questions
CBSE Class 10 Science Important Questions Videos
CBSE Class 10 Hindi Lessons Explanation
CBSE Class 10 Hindi Chapter-wise Video Explanation
CBSE Class 10 History Lessons Explanation
CBSE Class 10 SST Chapter-wise Video Explanations
CBSE Class 10 History MCQs
CBSE Class 10 Geography MCQs
CBSE Class 10 Civics MCQs
CBSE Class 10 Social Science Important Questions
CBSE Class 10 Sanskrit Video Explanations

		Other Classes			CBSE Class 12 English Lesson Explanation
CBSE Class 12 English MCQs
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 12 
CBSE Class 12 English Important Question
CBSE Class 11 English Lesson Explanation
CBSE Class 11 English MCQs
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 11
CBSE Class 11 English Important Questions
CBSE Class 9 English Lesson Explanation
CBSE Class 9 English MCQs
CBSE Class 9 English Chapter-wise Video Explanation
CBSE Class 9 English MCQs Videos
CBSE Class 9 English Important Questions Videos
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 9 
CBSE Class 9 Science Lessons
CBSE Class 9 Hindi Lessons
CBSE Class 9 Hindi MCQs
CBSE Class 9 Science Chapter-wise Video Explanation
CBSE Class 9 Science MCQs Videos
CBSE Class 9 Hindi Chapter-wise Video Explanation
Class 8 English Lesson Explanation
Class 8 English MCQs
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 8
Class 8 Hindi Lesson Explanations
Class 8 Science Lesson Explanation
Class 8 English, History, Geography, and Civics MCQs
Class 8 Social Science Lesson Explanation
Class 7 English Lesson Explanation
Class 7 English Chapter wise Video Explanation
Class 7 History MCQs
Take Free Online MCQs Test for Class 7
CBSE Class 6 English Lesson Explanation
English Grammar Lessons
Essays in English 
Essays in Hindi
Hindi Grammar Lessons 
English Writing Skills 
Important Full Forms

					
		General			
Onam Wishes in Hindi
Happy Makar Sankrati Wishes in Hindi
Republic Day Wishes in Hindi
Happy Maha Shivratri Wishes in Hindi
Gudi Padwa Wishes in Hindi
Holika Dahan & Holi Wishes in Hindi
Basant Panchami / Saraswati puja wishes in Hindi
Happy Journey Wishes in Hindi
New Year Wishes in Hindi
Diwali Wishes in Hindi
Friendship Day Wishes in Hindi
Dussehra wishes in Hindi
Navratri Wishes in Hindi
Hindi Diwas Quotes in Hindi 
Congratulations Message in Hindi
Teacher’s Day Wishes in Hindi
Ganesh Chaturthi Wishes in Hindi
Janmashtami Messages in Hindi
Raksha Bandhan Wishes in Hindi
Birthday Wishes in Hindi
Anniversary Wishes in Hindi
Father’s Day Quotes and Messages
Father’s Day quotes in Hindi
International Yoga Day Slogans, Quotes and Sayings
अंतर्राष्ट्रीय योग दिवस Slogans, Quotes and Sayings
Good Morning Messages in Hindi
Good Night Messages in Hindi | शुभ रात्रि संदेश
Wedding Wishes in Hindi

 
 

		Tips and Tricks			Tips to score 95% in English paper
Tips for scoring full marks in Notice Writing question
Tips to score more in Speech writing question
Tips to score full marks in Formal letter writing question
Tips to Crack Class 10 Board Exams 2023
Ten tips on writing a good essay
Simple tips and tricks to score well in examinations
Tips for Developing Confidence
Quick Exam Tips and Tricks
Tips for Success in your Career
Exam Preparation Tips
Exam Stress Management Tips for Parents

					




			
		
	
	

	
			
		
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				CBSE School Lessons
			
					
					
					
					
					
						
						
							
								Class 12 English
Class 12 MCQ Test
Class 11 English
Class 11 MCQs Test
Class 10 English
Class 10 MCQs Test
Class 10 SST
Class 10 Science
Class 10 Hindi A
Class 10 Hindi B
Class 10 Sanskrit
Class 9 English
Class 9 English Communicative
Class 9 Science
Class 9 SST
Class 9 Hindi
Class 9 MCQs Test
Class 8 English
Class 8 Science
Class 8 Hindi
Class 8 SST

							
							
							
							
				
					
				
			
						
						
					
				
			
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
			
					
					
					
					
					
						
						
							
								Class 7 English
Class 7 Hindi
Class 6 English
Essay Writing in English
Essay Writing in Hindi
Learn English Grammar
Hindi Grammar
English Writing Skills
Hindi Writing Skills
BSEB Class 12 English
ICSE Class 10 English
BSEB Class 10 English
Maharashtra Class 10 English
JKBOSE Class 10 English
West Bengal Class 10 English
MAHA Class 9 English
WB Class 9 English
ICSE Class 9 English

							
							
							
							
				
					
				
			
						
						
					
				
			
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				Popular Pages
			
					
					
					
					
					
						
						
							
								Class 9 English Imp Questions
CBSE Class 10 Important Questions
Class 11 English Imp Questions
Class 12 English Imp Questions
Letter Writing Class 10
Letter Writing in Hindi
Report Writing
Analytical Paragraph
Notice Writing
Paragraph Writing
Email Lekhen
Letter to the Editor Examples

							
							
							
							
				
					
				
			
						
						
					
				
				
				
				
				
				
			
			
				
				
				
				
			
				
				
			
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
Contact Us      
About      
Privacy Policy          
  Disclaimer       
Sitemap

			
				
				
				
				
				Copyright © 2025 All Rights Reserved
